
Methods
Several precursor ion selection strategies are conceivable depending
on the aim of a study and the available prior knowledge about the
sample. Here, we focus on three settings: the first two use static
inclusion lists created once before the MS/MS acquisition starts. The
third changes the selection based on previous identifications. The
two static inclusion list approaches differ in the information used
during the selection process. In the following, when talking about
peptides we refer to protein subsequences as opposed to precursors
which denote MS/MS measurements.
• Feature-based inclusion list: Given an LC-MS feature map, we
want to maximize the number of scheduled precursors given some
constraints on the number of simultaneous acquisitions per RT
fraction. This is a common scenario with LC-MALDI due to its
decoupled nature of LC and MS.
• Protein-based inclusion list: Given a list of protein sequences but
no prior LC-MS run, we want to find an optimal set of precursors
that represents the proteins of interest best. As proteins are not
identified directly we need to find a peptide set that optimally
covers our specific proteins. For this peptide set, we predict the LC-
MS features (i.e. retention time and m / z acquisition window) and
add them to the inclusion list.
• Iterative precursor ion selection: Given an LC-MALDI-MS
feature map, we want to optimally exploit the set of possible
precursors. Optimality in this case means that we want to identify
the proteins in a sample using a minimal set of precursors, so that
the remaining precursors can be used to discover other proteins.
The precursor ion selection shall be adjusted during the ongoing
MS/MS acquisition based on previous peptide and protein
identifications. This way, we combine the discovery nature of DDA
with directed MS/MS. As with both inclusion list formulations, the
number of MS/MS acquisitions is limited by the number of
precursors per RT fraction.
These settings can be formulated as optimization problems, which
can be formalized as Integer Linear Programs (ILP). Solving the ILPs
yields a list of precursor ions, the actual inclusion list. In the
following sections we will introduce and explain the formulations.
Feature-based inclusion list
Given a feature map, we want to schedule the highest possible
number of features as precursors for MS/MS-fragmentation. Since a
feature elutes over several scans we have the option to choose the
feature as precursor in any of those scans. Ideally, one would like to
use for each feature a fraction with a high signal intensity for
fragmentation. A greedy approach (GA) chooses for each feature the
fraction with the highest signal intensity. Then, in each fraction the
highest of these feature maxima are scheduled for MS/MS.
However, situations can be constructed where GA selects less
features than a global strategy that tries to optimize the selection
for all features simultaneously. An illustration of such a situation is
shown in Figure 1. In the following, we present a formulation of the
feature-based precursor ion selection as optimization problem.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Feature-based precursor ion selection. (a) LC-MS map containing
four features a - d. (b) MS spectra of the same map with feature
peaks. The coloured ellipses show the selected precursors for the
different strategies: green with DDA, blue with GA and red with the
ILP. Limiting the number of precursors to 2 per spectrum, feature c
is never chosen neither with DDA nor with GA. With GA no feature
is selected in spectrum S3. The ILP selection selects all four features
once.
For each feature j, we introduce a set of binary variables xj,s, which
are set to 1 if we choose feature j in scan s as a precursor and 0
otherwise. Since we want to choose the best possible fraction for
each precursor, we do not simply maximize the number of
scheduled precursors but use the feature intensities as weights,
because high intensity features are more likely to produce good and
interpretable MS/MS spectra. The intensities are normalized by the
maximal signal intensity the respective feature has in any spectrum.
This results in weights between 0 and 1 and prevents a bias towards
selecting only high intensity features.
We have two constraints: first, the capacity of spectrum s, i.e., the
maximal possible number of acquired MS/MS spectra in spectrum s.
And second, the number of times a feature can be selected as a
precursor which is set to 1 here, but this constraint could easily be
relaxed to other values. Table 1 gives an overview of all variables
and constants used in the LP formulations.
Table 1.
Variables and constants used in LP formulations
Variable
name
Explanation
xj,s
Indicator variable, 1 if feature j is selected in
spectrum s,
 
0 otherwise
xj
Indicator variable, 1 if feature j is part of the solution,
 
0 otherwise
intj,s
Normalized signal intensity of feature j in spectrum s
caps
Maximal number of MS/MS precursors in spectrum s
Di
Detectability of protein i
yi
-log(1-Di), higher values reflect a better protein
detectability
dk
Detectability of peptide k
ai,k
Indicator variable, 1 if peptide k is part of protein i,
 
0 otherwise
ws
RT window size
tp
Predicted RT
max_list_size maximal number of elements in inclusion list
pk
Probability that peptide k was identified correctly
Pi
Probability that protein i was identified correctly
k1,k2,k3
Weights
bi
Indicator variable, 1 if the protein probability of
protein i is at least c, 0 otherwise
c
Minimal protein probability to declare a protein
identified
zi
zi = 1 if Pi ≥ c, otherwise zi ∈ [0, 1)
