
Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Giuseppe Marcolin
2,*, Roberto Di Marco
Roberto Di Marco
3Centro Protesi, INAIL, Bologna, Italy
Methodology, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Roberto Di Marco
3, Andrea G Cutti
Andrea G Cutti
3Centro Protesi, INAIL, Bologna, Italy
Project administration, Supervision, Data curation, Writing – review
& editing
Find articles by Andrea G Cutti
3, Gian Luca Migliore
Gian Luca Migliore
3Centro Protesi, INAIL, Bologna, Italy
Writing – review & editing, Data curation
Find articles by Gian Luca Migliore
3, Nicola Petrone
Nicola Petrone
1Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Padova,
Padova, Italy
Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization, Writing – review &
editing, Formal analysis, Resources
Find articles by Nicola Petrone
1
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13291931  PMID: 42358507
Abstract
Running-specific prostheses (RSPs) enable individuals with lower-
limb amputation to compete in Paralympic running disciplines. In a
high-level sports context, optimal RSP tuning based on
biomechanical parameters is essential to enhance running
performance. Although on-track assessment is considered the gold
standard, its high financial and logistical demands make treadmill-
based setups valuable alternatives. Therefore, this single-case study
aimed to present a method for assessing steady-state running (SSR)
and resisted acceleration running (RAR) in an amputee athlete,
comparing different RSP alignments. The experimental setup
combined a commercial treadmill mounted over four dynamometric
platforms with an eight-camera motion capture system, enabling
the kinetic, kinematic, and spatiotemporal assessment of different
RSP configurations. Differences in biomechanical parameters were
observed between RSP configurations during both SSR and RAR,
including variations in GRFs and corresponding impulses, as well as
hip, knee, and ankle kinematics. However, the sensitivity of the
proposed method in detecting biomechanical differences should be
interpreted with caution, as it is based on a single Paralympic
athlete. In conclusion, these findings suggest that the treadmill-
based protocol may serve as a functional and controlled screening
tool for preliminary performance-oriented RSP tuning, enabling the
identification of promising configurations prior to definitive
assessments on an instrumented athletics track.
Keywords: Paralympic sprinters, running mechanics, running
prosthetic foot, sprinting acceleration, treadmill
Introduction
Running-specific prostheses (RSPs) enable athletes with lower limb
amputations to compete in sport activities, including running
competitions. Among these, the 100-m sprint remains a hallmark of
the Paralympic Games, and winners are considered “the world's
fastest athletes” (1).
The 100-m sprint can be divided into three phases: the acceleration
phase (0–30 m), the maximum steady-speed phase (30–90 m), and
the deceleration phase (90–100 m) (2). This classification is used
for both able-bodied athletes and athletes with lower-limb
amputation. Each of these phases requires specific training methods
to improve overall sprinting performance, as the acceleration and
maximum speed are associated with distinct biomechanical outputs
(3).
Moreover, sprint performance is influenced by multiple factors,
such as equipment, environment, and psycho-physiological
conditions (4). RSP tuning represents a valid intervention
contributing to enhancing spatiotemporal parameters (5), and
running speed (6). Tuning may involve variations in shape (7) and
stiffness (8, 9) of the running prosthetic foot (RPF), as well as
socket alignment in the sagittal plane relative to the RPF (10, 11).
Quantitative biomechanical parameters, particularly kinetic [e.g.,
ground reaction forces (GRFs)] and kinematic (e.g., joint angles)
parameters, are essential for evaluating the effects of RSP tuning on
sprint performance. Indeed, as reported by Migliore et al. (10),
specific alignments compared with others may reduce prosthetic-
side hip extension at foot-off (FO) while preserving hip range of
motion (ROM), decrease hip moment impulse, and enhance
horizontal propulsion, thereby improving both comfort and
performance. Ideally, such assessments should be conducted on
track using instrumentation that does not hinder or restrict the
athlete's natural running technique, thus allowing realistic
competitive conditions to be reproduced. However, biomechanical
analysis of a 100-m sprint in such settings is resource-intensive; for
example, Nagahara and colleagues used 54 embedded force
platforms (12). Although setups based on dense arrays of force
platforms can provide high-quality data, their substantial logistical
and financial demands may limit their practical application. To
address these constraints, instrumented treadmills have become an
increasingly accessible and widely adopted alternative for
biomechanical assessment (13–17). Indeed, treadmill running
equipped with force platforms provides a controlled testing
environment, as the imposed belt speed allows the collection of
consistent and repeatable consecutive steps compared with
overground running (18). Moreover, treadmills are widely accepted
in biomechanical running analysis (19) and have been used to
predict in-field performance (18). However, instrumented
motorized treadmills hardly reproduce the sprinting acceleration
phase, which is crucial for achieving high running velocities (2).
Consequently, they have been primarily used for assessment at
steady-state speeds (10, 13, 20). In contrast, passive treadmills may
represent a more suitable alternative for investigating sprint
acceleration, as they allow the athlete to directly generate belt
motion through force application and can be combined with
external resistance to better simulate horizontal inertial demand.
However, such systems specifically designed to evaluate sprint
acceleration remain scarce (21) and have been used only with able-
bodied athletes (22, 23). To our knowledge, no studies have
investigated the sprint acceleration phase on treadmills in athletes
with lower-limb amputations.
In light of the findings of Migliore et al. (10), which highlighted the
importance of prosthetic alignment in influencing running
performance, this single-case study aimed to compare two RSP
tuning configurations (ST9° and ST15°), representing a more closed
and a more open alignment, respectively. Using a controlled and
repeatable treadmill-based setup with four force platforms, we
investigated how these two alignment conditions affect kinetic and
kinematic parameters. We hypothesized that the more open
alignment (ST15°) would result in greater anterior–posterior (AP)
GRF propulsive peaks and corresponding impulses. In addition, we
expected that this configuration would be associated with a more
preflexed hip angle compared with the more closed alignment
(ST9°).
Materials and methods
Participants
One female athlete with left transfemoral amputation (mass: 55 kg,
height: 1.60 m, age: 19, classification: T63), and a 100-m medalist
in the 2020 Paralympic Games, participated in this study. The data
collection protocol was implemented as part of her standard
assessment routine and training during the 2023–2024 Paralympic
season to support certified prosthetists in evaluating different RSPs
for elite sprinters in preparation for the Paralympic Games in Paris.
Written consent to disclose the data was obtained prior to testing
from the athlete. During tests, she wore a 1E91 Standard Runner
Cat 3.5 RPF (Ottobock, Germany) and a 3S80 monoaxial prosthetic
knee joint (Ottobock, Germany).
Experimental protocol
The experimental protocol was designed to assess biomechanical
parameters associated with different RSP tuning configurations
under controlled and repeatable conditions. In particular, running
tests were performed on a commercial treadmill (SkillRun,
Technogym, Italy) at the Department of Industrial Engineering,
University of Padova. The treadmill was positioned over four force
platforms (P-6000, BTS, Italy) operating at 1,000 Hz, with each of
its four support feet centered on one separate platform to allow
accurate measurement of GRFs.
The setup (Figure 1) was located within the calibrated volume of an
eight-camera motion capture system (SMART DX-6000, BTS, Italy),
operating at 250 Hz. The cameras were arranged in a squared
configuration around the treadmill, while the handrails and monitor
of the treadmill were replaced with an external support frame to
minimize the occlusion of markers. A safety harness was used to
secure the athlete to the ceiling in case of a fall during the sprints.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
On the left, the marker set adopted in the study (24); on the right,
the schematic representation of the experimental setup.
Retro-reflective markers were placed on anatomical landmarks of
the athlete's body and prosthesis (Figure 1), as described elsewhere
(24). The athlete then performed a familiarization phase, which also
served as a warm-up, consisting of walking and running at self-
selected speeds for 15 min.
Two running conditions were considered: steady-state running
(SSR) and resisted acceleration running (RAR). For each condition,
trials were performed with the socket tilt set to 9° (ST9°) and 15°
(ST15°) relative to gravity in the sagittal plane (10). For both socket
alignments, the anterior displacement of the tip of the unloaded
RPF relative to the line connecting hip and knee joint centers was
set to 55 mm with the knee fully extended. The ST9° and ST15°
alignment configurations are commonly adopted by athletes based
on the clinical experience of prosthetic technicians, with ST15°
representing the standard prosthetic alignment. Although the
absolute difference between the two tested alignments is small (6°),
it is relatively large compared with the ranges reported in previous
studie