
Method
Participants and Setting
Participants included two current male drivers with HVFL, one with
left homonymous quadrantanopia (LHQ) and the other with a left
homonymous scotoma (LHS; Figure 1, Panel A), each of whom
drove >180 km/wk (Table 1), and two male drivers of a
comparable age with normal vision (NV) from similar geographic
locations to provide comparison data. Neither of the drivers with
HVFL reported any driving accidents or incidents after they had
resumed driving after the onset of HVFL. Participants were
recruited from a database of individuals who had previously taken
part in research studies at the study site, as well as through an
online recruitment portal hosted by the study site’s institution. All
participants provided written informed consent prior to taking part
in the study, and all met the eligibility criteria: age ≥18 yr,
possession of a valid driver’s license, and a minimum of 2 yr of
driving experience. No participant reported physical impairments
that would affect vehicle operation, and no cognitive impairment
was identified with the Montreal Cognitive Assessment; scores
ranged from 26 to 29 (Nasreddine et al., 2005).
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Visual field characteristics of drivers with homonymous visual field
loss and overview of head scan measurement in naturalistic driving.
Note. Panel A: Binocular visual field plots (Goldmann perimeter,
target V4e [size V, a 64 mm2 target at brightest luminance level,
4e]) of a driver with left homonymous quadrantanopia (LHQ; left)
and left homonymous scotoma (LHS; right). Panel B: Dashcam setup
with one camera facing the road and one facing the driver, along
with GPS logging capability. Panel C: Example of synchronized road
and cabin view recordings. The red, green, and blue lines overlaid
on the driver’s face represent the X, Y, and Z axes of head
orientation. Panel D: Head yaw rotation plotted as a function of
time to intersection entry. Negative means left; positive means
right. A head scan was defined as a rotation exceeding 20° for at
least 167 ms, occurring within 20 m before the intersection. Solid
circles mark the time points where scans were detected.
Table 1.
Summary of Participants’ Demographic and Driving Characteristics
Characteristic
Participant
LHQ
LHS
NV1
NV2
Sex
M
M
M
M
Age, yr
63
52
62
47
Cause of visual field loss
Stroke Stroke
NA
NA
Time since the onset, yr
3
6
NA
NA
Poststroke driving experience, yr
2
6
NA
NA
Visual acuity (logMAR)
0.03 −0.17 −0.08 −0.01
Age at first driving license, yr
16
16
16
16
Total hr of driving recorded
116
74
149
257
Time spent driving/wk, hr
5.2
9.2
9.9
13.5
Total km driven during recording
5,799 4,064
6,647 13,121
Distance driven/wk, km
181
508
443
691
Total no. of left turn intersections
analyzed
89
336
123
387
Open in a new tab
Note. LHQ = left homonymous quadrantanopia; LHS = left
homonymous scotoma; logMAR = logarithm of the Minimum Angle
of Resolution (0.00 logMAR = 20/20 Snellen visual acuity); M =
male; NA = not applicable; NV = normal vision.
Daily driving was recorded using a Zubie (Bloomington, MN)
dashcam installed in each driver’s own vehicle. The road-facing
camera recorded the scene through the front windshield, and the
cabin camera captured the driver’s head (Figure 1, Panels B and C).
Analyses focused on T and four-way intersections with a stop sign,
traffic light, or no control device, driven through at least 20 times
to ensure sufficient data (Table 1). Vehicle speed, GPS data, and the
processing of road-facing videos enabled identification of
intersections and annotation of their configurations, traffic control
devices, and driving maneuvers (Pundlik et al., 2025).
Outcome Measures
For each intersection, video clips were extracted from
approximately 100 m before to 100 m after the intersection. Road
camera footage was manually reviewed to determine the time of
intersection entry and characterize the traffic environment,
including cross-traffic volume from the left (the side of the visual
field loss), and adverse environmental conditions. Each clipped
video was typically <1 min in duration, and manual review
required approximately 2 min/clip.
Cabin footage was processed using a deep learning–based model to
compute head yaw (horizontal rotation; Pundlik et al., 2025). A
scan was defined as a yaw rotation >20° from the driver’s straight-
ahead direction for at least 167.7 ms (Figure 1, Panel D). Because
the majority (>80%) of head scans occurred within 20 m of the
intersection, we analyzed head-scanning behaviors from 20 m
before the intersection to the point of entry, including (1) the
leftward scan proportion, (2) the scan presence rate (≥1 scan), (3)
scan frequency (number of scans per intersection), and (4) average
scan magnitudes. Whenever there was no scan toward the left side
(the blind side for the HVFL participants), intersection videos were
manually reviewed to characterize the situation.
Data Analysis
For within-subject paired comparisons, we used χ2 tests to compare
leftward and rightward scan presence rates and Wilcoxon signed-
rank tests to compare other leftward and rightward scan metrics.
For between-group comparisons (HVFL vs. NV), we used Mann–
Whitney U tests to compare scan presence rates between drivers.
We further analyzed scan metrics across repeated intersection visits
using Scheirer–Ray–Hare tests to examine the effect of left-side
cross-traffic (presence vs. absence) across scan directions and its
differential effects by vision condition (HVFL vs. NV). Statistical
significance was set at p < .05.
Results
Naturalistic Driving Context
