
Methods
Subjects and study protocol
A total of 12 healthy subjects (age 20–26 years) participated in the
study. The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of
the Tampere University Hospital. The actual protocol consists of
several different phases, but only two of them were used in this
study. In the first phase (lasting 12 minutes), the subjects were
studied whilst breathing spontaneously. After this phase the
spectrum of the respiration flow signal was calculated and the peak
frequency was determined. In the second phase (lasting 12
minutes), the subjects were studied using metronome-controlled
breathing where the breathing frequency was adjusted to the value
of the peak frequency of the respiration flow from the first phase.
This arrangement guaranteed that in the second phase all subjects
could breath at their natural breathing frequency so that the
breathing frequency did not vary significantly. The spontaneous
breathing frequency varied from 0.12 Hz to 0.25 Hz. Before the first
phase there was 15 minutes adaptation time to stabilize the
hemodynamics, and there was a 5-minute rest period between the
first and second phases. In all recordings the subjects were in supine
position. Since the subjects were forced to follow the metronome
sound it was possible to verify that they were not asleep.
Data acquisition
The following data were measured: ECG (Rigel 302 Cardioscope),
continuous noninvasive blood pressure from the left middle finger
(2300 BP Monitor, Ohmeda Inc., USA), pulmonary air flow (M909,
Medikro Oy, Finland), expiration CO2 and O2 concentrations by
capnometer (Datex Normocap, Datex Inc., USA), and oxygen
saturation at the left ear lobe (Datex Satlite, Datex Inc. USA). All
signals were digitized at a sampling rate of 200 Hz (WinAcq data
acquisition system, Absolute Aliens Oy, Finland). The RRI time
series were generated by detecting the R peaks of the ECG signal,
and the SAP and diastolic pressure time series were generated by
finding the corresponding beat-to-beat minimum and maximum on
the blood-pressure signal within each RRI. All data analyses were
performed with WinCPRS software (Absolute Aliens Oy, Finland).
Spectral analysis
The choice of spectral methods used in this study was critical to the
detection of any fine structure in the RRI and SAP spectrum within
the LF range below 0.15 Hz. There are two main factors that must
be considered carefully. First, in spectral analysis the frequency
resolution is higher when longer time series are used, but only if the
system under study is stationary over the time interval of the
analysis, and in the present study we cannot make any assumptions
in regard to the stationarity of the system a priori. If the system
varies significantly in the parameter space, the spectrum calculated
over a long time interval is an averaged result, and hence any small
time-varying details in the oscillatory patterns of the signal will be
lost. Secondly, if the analysis method used in the spectral
calculations provides us with the necessary frequency resolution,
using a very short time series in our analysis increases the
likelihood of capturing the true structure of the spectrum in the
case of a nonstationary signal. The problem is how to assure that a
representative sample of the signal is used. One solution is to
calculate several short-term spectra, and search for patterns that
can be found on all of them. We have done this by calculating the
spectra using a sliding time window of reasonably short duration
and a time step that is much smaller than the window width. Since
it is rather unlikely that there are sudden or abrupt changes in the
heart-rate or blood-pressure regulation system, especially when the
subjects are studied whilst supine, we can assume that RRI and SAP
spectra vary only slowly. When tracking the position of the
dominant frequency components we can easily recognize the
fundamental modes since the corresponding spectral peaks will
appear as continuous paths on the time–frequency plots.
We applied three methods to the spectral analysis of RRI and SAP
time series: Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), autoregression model
(AR), and Wigner-Ville distribution (WVD). We selected these
methods because they are based on totally different mathematical
approaches and therefore their combined use increases the
likelihood of validating our results. Detailed description of each of
these spectral methods can be found on Appendix (see Additional
file: 1). AR method is most suitable for searching the principal
frequency components since the spectrum can be easily decomposed
using pole-expansion of the spectrum. In contrast, with FFT or WVD
method it is difficult to determine accurately the positions of the
spectral peaks. However, the use of AR method is also problematic
since the essential parameter of it, the optimal model order, is
difficult to determine. Therefore we have used non-parametric FFT
and WVD methods to help us for finding the best model order: the
model order of the AR spectrum was adjusted in such a manner that
the overall shape of the spectrum resembles FFT and WVD spectra.
FFT and WVD spectra have typically reasonably high spectral
resolution in the low frequency range but poor statistical relevance.
The latter one can be improved by smoothing the spectra but then
we decrease frequency resolution. This unavoidable trade-off
between statistical relevance and resolution complicates detecting
spectral peaks reliably: spectra can include spurious features.
However, since FFT and WVD spectra are computed using different
mathematical approach it is very unlikely that these features appear
simultaneously on both spectra, and therefore the combined used of
FFT and WVD to resolve the optimal AR model order is crucial.
Results
A typical spectral analysis of the RRI of one subject is presented in
Fig. 1. The time–frequency plots (upper panels) were generated
using three different methods: Fast Fourier transform (FFT),
Wigner-Ville distribution (WVD), and autoregression (AR). The AR
method has been used with two models: one of order 12 and the
other of order 20. All methods are capable of distinguishing the
respiration component, which in this case is located at 0.15 Hz.
Below this respiration frequency the nonparametric methods – FFT
and WVD – reveal at least two distinct components that appear in
the figure as continuous red paths. With the FFT method, the paths
are not very clear because of the limited frequency resolution. In
the WVD plot the components are separated much better but the
background of the spectrum is contaminated by mixing of the main
components (chessboard-type pattern), as explained in Appendix
(see Additional file: 1). With the parametric AR method, the
appearance of the spectrum depends heavily on the model order.
When using the model order determined by Akaike's information
criterion (AIC; 12 in this specific case), the spectrum is strongly
smoothed and only one component can be seen below the
respiration frequency (AR(12) in Fig. 1). When the model order is
increased to 20, two separate LF components appear (AR(20) in Fig.
1). To show the differences more clearly, in the lower panels of Fig.
1 we show cross-sections of the time–frequency plots at certain
moments of time (marked with the white dashed lines). Both FFT
and WVD spectra exhibit two peaks, at 0.06 Hz and 0.09 Hz, and
perhaps also another two around 0.02 Hz. In the AR(12) spectrum
there is only one wide spectral peak visible, but in the AR(20)
spectrum there are two distinct peaks at the same positions as in the
FFT and WVD spectra, and a third lower one around 0.02 Hz. These
results clearly show that AR spectral methods, as commonly applied
(i.e. with a relatively low model order), are unable to reflect the
real frequency content of a signal; this leads to oversmoothed
spectral profiles and to overmodeling the actual variability. It
should be noted that in the FFT and WVD spectral densities the
height of each spectral peak corresponds directly to the spectral
power, whereas in the AR spectrum density the height of the peak is
proportional to the square of the power (the area under the peak is
proportional to the power). Therefore, the differences in the heights
of the peaks in the AR(20) spectrum are much higher that in the
FFT and WVD spectra.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Time–frequency plots of the R–R interval. The upper four panels
show the color-coded spectral densities as a function of time and
frequency (black corresponds to zero value, red with variable
intensity intermediate values, and white the maximum value). The
methods used in analysis are, from left: fast Fourier transform
(FFT), WVD, an autoregression (AR) model of order 12 (AR(12)),
and an AR model of order 20 (AR(20)). The lower four panels
display the local spectra as an intersection of the time–frequency
plots marked with the vertical dashed white lines. The respiration
frequency of 0.15 Hz is clearly visible on all plots. In the low-
frequency (LF) range below 0.15 Hz, FFT and WVD methods can
extract at least two dominant peaks at frequencies of 0.06 Hz and
0.09 Hz which are also visible as almost continuous paths on the
time–frequency plots. These peaks can be distinguished with the
AR(20) model but not with the AR(12) model.
We have performed the analysis described above on the RRI and
SAP time series of each subject. FFT, WVD, and AR spectra were
computed for each subject, and several cross-sections of time–
frequency plots were obtained in order to determine the minimum
AR model order required for the AR spectrum to show the same
main features evident in FFT and WVD spectra. Typically AR
spectra are not sensitive to the model order when the order is above
a certain value. When the final model order of the AR spectrum was
found we calculated the spectral decomposition by searching the
poles of the spectral density function, as explained in Appendix (see
Additional file: 1). The use of po