
Experimental setup
The PA camera system consists of a pulsed laser source, bi-concave
acoustic lens, and a transducer array. A tunable pulsed laser
(EKSPLA Inc NT-352A) with a pulse duration of 5 ns was used in
our experiment. We chose a graphite ball as the PA source. The
laser wavelength is selected to be 790 nm where the optical
absorption of graphite is high. The energy of the laser is set
approximately to 18 mJ/cm2. The acoustic lens was manufactured
using plastic material DSM18420 with 3D printing technology. For
hand-held imaging applications, we designed the lens with a radius
of curvature 33.5 mm and a diameter of 32 mm, resulting in a focal
length of 39.4 mm. The parameters were arbitrarily selected to limit
the length of the probe (4F) to 16 cm and diameter 4 cm. The lens
material has a sound speed of 2590 m/s and density of 884.17 kg/
m3, which enables impedance matching with water. With a
transmission coefficient of 0.95 and a reflection coefficient of 0.043,
more than 90% of the incident acoustic energy gets transmitted
through both sides of the lens. A 16 element linear transducer array
with an element size of 1 mm × 0.5 mm, the center frequency of 5
MHz and 55% bandwidth at −6 dB was used in the experiment.
The diameter of the graphite ball was selected to be 0.2 mm to
ensure that the dominant frequency generated by the PA source
falls within the transducer bandwidth. Signals acquired by the
transducer are then amplified by a custom-made preamplifier stage
of 50 dB gain and digitized using National Instruments PXI-5105 at
a sampling frequency of 60 MHz. The transducer array was placed
at 2F distance from the lens. The PA source, lens center, and
transducer array are collinear. To maintain constant optical energy,
the PA source (graphite ball) is kept constant with respect to the
laser. To change the object distance from the lens, the whole lens
and transducer set is moved with respect to the point source using a
linear motor stage (Zaber Technologies Inc).
We have conducted ex vivo tissue imaging to show the application
of refocusing algorithm in volumetric imaging. A 3D printed probe
with the lens at center and transducer plugged was used for
imaging the tissue. The tissue is of 24 mm × 40 mm × 3 mm in
size. A C-scan was conducted using a stepper motor, and the
measured A-line signals were stacked to form 3D data [4]. The
tissue was kept at an off-focal point of 2F + 5 mm from the lens
center. This gave us a defocused 3D image which was then
refocused for comparison.
3. Theory
Consider three-point PA sources inside the object at 2F, 2F + ΔO
and 2F-ΔO′. PA signal generated at 2F is focused at 2F distance on
the other side of the lens. B-scan is formed by acquiring A-line data
with linear array transducer and displaying it after envelope
detection (Fig. 2c). Similarly, the entire object plane at 2F can be
imaged as a C-scan with a transducer array. Fig. 1(c) shows a case
where the signal from a point source at 2F-ΔO′ get focused beyond
2F distance in a plane located at 2F+ΔI′. The distance 2F-ΔO′ and
2F+ΔI′ are related by the lens equation. Since the sensor array is at
2F, the US wavefront is detected before it reaches its optimal focal
point. This detected wavefront needs to be back-propagated to its
correct focal point as indicated in Fig. 1(b). The opposite happens
for a point source at 2F + ΔO as in Fig. 1(a). The optimal focal
point for this point source, according to lens equation is at 2F − ΔI,
but we are detecting the wave at 2F. This wavefront needs to be
forward propagated to its correct focal point as indicated in Fig.
1(d)
Figure 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
(a) PSF at FBF − 7 mm. (d) PSF at FBF + 7 mm. (c) PSF at FBF. (b)
Refocused PSF at FBF − 7 mm. (e) Refocused PSF a FBF + 7 mm.
The two cases with point sources at 2F-ΔO′ and 2F + ΔO can be
considered as two separate refocusing problems. Two different
algorithms are used to deal with this two-sided refocusing problem.
In the former case, a fast and convenient FFT based forward
propagation model is used while for the latter case, time reversal
followed by FFT based propagation is used.
4. Proposed Algorithm
Based on the preceding discussion, the whole problem of refocusing
boils down to the acoustic pressure detected by a planar sensor and
reconstructing the initial pressure from the measured pressure time
series. An FFT based time reversal method proposed by Kosli et al.
[11] is used to keep the possibility of real-time imaging. The
proposed algorithm is described next. The entire transducer time
series is divided into two halves with respect to the 2F time gate.
Each half of the time series is separately refocused and combined to
get the final image. Let pI (x, y, t) be one half of the measured
transducer time series, with I ∈ {2F +, 2F −} indicating the right
and left halves with respect to 2F time gate respectively. A
symmetric pressure profile p(x, y, t) = [pI (x, y, −t) pI (x, y, t)] is
formed by stacking mirror image of the time series pI (x, y, t). This
is to satisfy the symmetry condition of initial pressure p0(x, y, z) =
p0(x, y, −z), since it is unknown from the transducer measurement
whether the wave approached from the left or right of the sensing
plane. The time reversal is performed in the Fourier domain. To use
the FFT algorithm, the time component of the measured pressure
time series is considered to be the z axis. To obtain the angular
frequency ω, a weighting is used based on the dispersion relation
ω=ckx2+ky2+kz2[11].
P(kx,ky,ω)=ΓF{p(x,y,t)}, (1)
where {kx, ky, kz} are the wave number components, the scaling
factor Γ=cω2-c2kr2/2ω with kr=kx2+ky2 is the sound speed and
𝔽 is the 3D Fourier transform which can be computed using the FFT
algorithm. The inhomogeneous part of the wave should be set to
zero. Using the dispersion relation ( kz=(ω/c)2-kr2), we can map
the angular frequency ω in P (kx, ky, ω) to spatial wave number
component P (kx, ky, kz). This can be performed using an
interpolation [9]. The final image can now be reconstructed by
performing an inverse Fourier transform 𝔽−1.
p(x,y,z)=F-1{P(kx,ky,kz)}. (2)
This step also can be performed using the FFT algorithm. The
