
Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel,
24105 Kiel, Germany
Find articles by Philipp T Kaulich
§, Konrad Winkels
Konrad Winkels
§Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for
Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel,
24105 Kiel, Germany
Find articles by Konrad Winkels
§, Andreas Tholey
Andreas Tholey
§Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for
Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel,
24105 Kiel, Germany
Find articles by Andreas Tholey
§, Oliver Kohlbacher
Oliver Kohlbacher
†Applied Bioinformatics, Department for Computer Science,
University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
‡Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
∥Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, 72076
Tübingen, Germany
Find articles by Oliver Kohlbacher
†,‡,∥,*
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC11525931  PMID: 39424290
Abstract
[image]
Accurate quantification of individual proteoforms is a crucial step in
identifying proteome-wide alterations in different biological
conditions. Intact proteoforms have been analyzed predominantly
by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based top-
down proteomics (TDP) and quantified primarily by the label-free
quantification (LFQ) method, as it requires no additional costly
labeling. In TDP, due to frequent coelution and complex signal
structures, overlapping signals deriving from multiple proteoforms
complicate accurate quantification. Here, we introduce
FLASHQuant for MS1-level LFQ analysis in TDP, which is capable of
automatically resolving and quantifying coeluting proteoforms. In
benchmark tests performed with both spike-in proteins and
proteome-level mixture data sets, FLASHQuant was shown to
perform highly accurate and reproducible quantification in short
runtimes of just a few minutes per LC-MS run. In particular, it was
demonstrated that resolving overlapping proteoforms boosts the
quantification accuracy. FLASHQuant is publicly available as
platform-independent open-source software at https://openms.org/
flashquant/, accompanied by the simple alignment algorithm
ConsensusFeatureGroupDetector for multiple LC-MS runs.
Introduction
Top-down proteomics (TDP) based on mass spectrometry (MS) is an
emerging analytical approach for the comprehensive identification
and characterization of intact proteoforms.1−6 The term
proteoform refers to all of the different molecular forms of a protein
that can originate from variations at genetic or protein levels, i.e.,
posttranslational modifications.1 TDP’s advantage over the
conventional bottom-up approach is its ability to preserve the intact
form of proteins by skipping the enzymatic digestion step prior to
MS, thus providing a more complete and accurate representation of
the biologically relevant proteoforms. In the past decade, research
in TDP has seen substantial improvements in protein separation, MS
techniques, and bioinformatic software and demonstrated its
potential to elucidate the important role of proteoforms in
biomedical processes.3,7−9 Technical advances have enabled
researchers to move forward from qualitative to quantitative
analysis on proteoform studies.10−12
Quantitative analysis is crucial in proteomics, as it opens the door
for comparative studies of proteins in different biological functions
or biomarker discovery.10,13,14 In principle, three general strategies
can be employed to quantify proteoform abundances: label-free
quantitation (LFQ), metabolic labeling, and chemical labeling.
Metabolic labeling has seldom been employed in TDP, mainly due
to inherent challenges such as interfering isotope patterns between
light/heavy labeled proteins.15−17 In contrast, chemical labeling-
based strategies such as isobaric labeling have been successfully
applied, but further improvements are still needed regarding the
labeling procedures as well as the bioinformatics data
interpretation.18,19
Therefore, the most widely applied approach in TDP is LFQ,11,12,20
which performs a relative quantification by direct comparison
between MS runs. It has advantages over the labeling method, such
as low costs (no need for expensive labeling reagents), fewer
experimental steps, and omission of increased sample complexity
(i.e., introduced in chemical labeling approaches due to incomplete
or overlabeling).
Nevertheless, the analysis of TDP-LFQ data is still a major
bottleneck. Existing data analysis tools for MS1 level quantification
(including chromatographic feature detection and intensity
calculation) still need further developments and improvements
regarding reproducibility, overlapping signal resolution, or
usability.
LFQ of proteoforms in most cases still relies on deconvolution-
centric software, such as Protein Deconvolution (Thermo Fisher
Scientific),21,22 DataAnalysis (Bruker Daltonics),23−25 TopPIC
suite,5,26,27 and ProMex.28,29 As the primary goal of deconvolution
tools is to detect proteoforms’ masses rather than quantify them,
chromatographic information needed for quantification is widely
neglected on these platforms. This results in limited peak coverage
and compromises reproducibility in quantification. Therefore, many
LFQ studies have been performed using in-house scripts to retrieve
chromatographic data based on deconvoluted proteoform masses.
Despite its significance, the problem of overlapping signals in LFQ
studies has often been overlooked.2,30 Overlapping signals occur
when the distinct proteoforms interfere with each other (i.e.,
sharing mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) values), primarily due to the
complexity of the samples and the coelution of multiple
proteoforms from the LC within a narrow retention window. TDP,
which deals with larger analytes compared to bottom-up proteomics
or metabolomics, exacerbates this issue; the larger size of analytes
(proteoforms) leads to broader isotopic envelopes and wider charge
state ranges compared to those of peptides, contributing to the data
set’s high complexity. As a result, coeluted proteoforms of different
charge states can occupy similar or overlapping m/z ranges even
when they have highly distinct masses,2,31 introducing possible
quantification bias, particularly in the above-mentioned
deconvolution-centric approaches. Thus, the overlapping signal
issue should be addressed for accurate LFQ in TDP, which
necessitates advanced data analysis strategies.
Several TDP-LFQ data analysis algorithms have been developed but
are not freely available to users, e.g., QMT20 and IPQuant,32 and
commercial platforms such as ProSightPD (Proteinaceous, Inc.,
Evanston, USA).
Here, we introduce FLASHQuant, a fast and robust tool for MS1-
level LFQ analysis in TDP. FLASHQuant incorporates an individual
chromatogram extraction procedure and a conflicting feature (i.e.,
overlapping proteoform signals) resolution method using a non-
negative least-squares solver. In our evaluation, FLASHQuant
demonstrated its effectiveness compared to the widely used
ProSightPD, TopFD31 (from the TopPIC Suite), and
FLASHDeconv.33 Also, since quantitative analysis inevitably
accompanies multiple MS runs, we implemented
ConsensusFeatureGroupDetector to align quantified proteoforms
across multiple MS runs. As part of OpenMS,34 both FLASHQuant
and ConsensusFeatureGroupDetector are publicly available as
platform-independent open-source software with a graphical user
interface at https://OpenMS.org/FLASHQuant.
Materials and Methods
Structure of FLASHQuant
FLASHQuant is composed of two main stages: feature group
detection and quantity calculation (Figure 1). Feature group refers
to the group of LC features of different charge states from a single
putative proteoform and its isotopes. For accurate quantification,
the detected feature groups are refined while the quantities are
calculated.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Illustration of FLASHQuant algorithm. From a centroided LC-MS1
full scan, FLASHQuant extracts m/z traces (individual ion
chromatograms), denoted as black curved lines at the top-center.
Detected m/z traces are then assembled into feature groups,
representing putative proteoforms. Feature groups (depicted as
yellow and green) often share m/z traces (the mixed-colored line),
which should be resolved for accurate quantification. The
theoretical shapes of each feature group are estimated using its
nonshared m/z traces by fitting them against an exponential-
Gaussian hybrid (EGH) function. Based on the estimated shapes
(having retention time and intensity values), the proportion of each
shape (q1 and q2) in the shared trace is estimated with a non-
negative least-squares solver. Then, the shared m/z trace quantity is
distributed between the corresponding feature groups. The feature
group abundances are finally calculated as the summed area of m/z
traces in each feature group. The output of FLASHQuant is given as
a TSV format file.
The feature group detection stage starts with extracting m/z traces
(individual ion chromatograms) from the LC-MS spectra using
MassTraceExtractor.35 MassTraceExtractor is a self-consistent kernel
density estimator that connects peaks having m/z values within the
tolerance (defined by the instrument’s mass accuracy) along the
retention time. Thus, each extracted m/z trace represents a
chromatographic signal having a specific charge state and isotopic
composition over an elution window. This m/z trace extraction is
performed before deconvolution to reduce noises, similar to the
Sliding Window Algorithm36 in ProSightPD. Then, the windows are
set by binning the total retention time of the LC-MS run. The
extracted m/z traces are deconvolved per window and assembled
into feature groups by FLASHDeconv. Both charge and isotope
deconvolution are applied to m/z traces to determine the masses. In
this step, an m/z trace may be assigned to multiple feature groups
representing the overlappin