
Methods
A retrospective review of patients with suspected BONHE referred
to a tertiary centre ED between 2017 and 2022. We collected
demographics, referral source, clinical assessment, neuroimaging
and retinal imaging results. Final diagnosis and treatment outcomes
were compared between those managed as inpatients and those
managed as outpatients.
Results
100 patients were referred to the ED with a suspected BONHE. Most
were referred by optometrists (54) or general practitioners (17). 54
were admitted (group A) and 38 were discharged from ED (group
B). The remaining eight had incomplete records, transferred out of a
public health system or self-discharged. The median duration of
stay in the ED was 5 hours (IQR 3.45–6.12). The most common
diagnosis for both groups was idiopathic intracranial hypertension
(IIH). 47 patients at follow-up had moderate to severe IIH and other
significant pathologies. For these patients, vision impairment at
presentation is the only statistically significant predictor on
multivariate analysis (p=0.03). Based on the final diagnoses, 26
out of 48 patients (54.2%) in group A were diagnosed with IIH,
with a median duration from presentation to diagnosis of 2 days
(IQR 1–4 days). In group B, 8 out of 29 patients (27.5%) were
diagnosed with IIH on follow-up, and the median duration from
first presentation to diagnosis was 16.8 days (IQR 5.8–57 days).
Conclusions
IIH is the most common diagnosis among ED presentations of
suspected BONHE in our study. We proposed a triage system for
prompt management of BONHE to optimise triage and timely
management of patients in the ED.
Keywords: papilloedema, idiopathic intracranial hypertension,
clinical guideline, transverse venous sinus stenting, intracranial
pressure
WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS
TOPIC
•  Papilloedema is a neuro-ophthalmology emergency requiring
urgent assessment, with idiopathic intracranial hypertension
(IIH) being the most common cause and a significant burden
on emergency and inpatient resources.
WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
•  This is the first Australian tertiary-centre study of bilateral
optic nerve head elevation (BONHE) management, finding
that 61% of patients had moderate-to-severe IIH or other
significant pathologies, with vision impairment at
presentation as the only independent predictor of clinically
significant disease. Admission was associated with earlier
diagnosis, demonstrating the value of structured triage for
timely diagnosis and resource optimisation.
HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT
RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY
•  We propose a traffic-light emergency department triage
system for BONHE to expedite selective admission and rapid
follow-up, standardising care and improving diagnostic
timeliness in resource-limited settings.
Introduction
Bilateral optic nerve head elevation (BONHE) occurs in a wide
range of ocular, systemic and neurological conditions including
pseudopapilloedema, malignant hypertension, papilloedema,
posterior uveitis and optic neuropathies secondary to inflammatory,
infiltrative, infective, nutritional or hereditary causes.1,3 While
some of these diagnoses require semiurgent management,
papilloedema requires urgent neuro-ophthalmologic assessment and
in some cases immediate surgical intervention.
Recent studies revealed that idiopathic intracranial hypertension
(IIH) accounts for most of the cases of BONHE presentation in the
outpatient and ED settings.1,3 The increasing prevalence of obesity
and the ease of access to optical coherence tomograph (OCT) and
non-mydriatic fundus photography through optometric practices
have led to a greater number and earlier presentations of IIH to the
ED.4 Clinical guidelines recommend urgent neurological assessment
and neuroimaging within 24 hours of the initial suspicion of
papilloedema presentation.5 However, this is impractical as many of
these cases are initially identified by optometrists who do not have
access to neuroaxis imaging themselves. In a resource-limited
setting, where urgent referral to a dedicated neuro-ophthalmology
outpatient service is met with a long waiting period, these IIH
suspect patients are sent directly to the ED.
This study aims to: (1) examine how patients presenting with
suspected BONHE are managed within the ED, (2) track the
outcome of these patients after they are discharged from the ED for
further inpatient or outpatient investigations and treatment and (3)
develop a safe and efficient triage protocol for BONHE presentation
to the ED.
Methods
We retrospectively reviewed the ED presentations of patients with
suspected BONHE over period (2017–2022) at a single public
tertiary referral centre in Western Australia.
The cases were identified from a manual search of the emergency
department (ED) electronic records using the keywords
“papilledema”, “optic disc swelling”, “idiopathic intracranial
hypertension/IIH” and “raised ICP”. We reviewed the medical
records of those identified from the search using the inclusion and
exclusion criteria. Inclusion criteria: primary presentation of
bilateral optic disc swelling or likely papilloedema. Exclusion
criteria: established history of idiopathic IIH.
Definite IIH was defined as opening pressure ≥25 cm H₂O on
lumbar puncture (LP) with papilloedema and typical clinical
features according to the 2013 Friedman revised criteria. Fulminant
IIH was defined as acute onset of severe visual loss within 4 weeks
with rapid progressive worsening over days and normal brain MRI/
MR venogram/CT venogram (CTV) excluding secondary causes.
Probable IIH was defined as typical clinical and radiological
features consistent with IIH in the absence of LP or with opening
pressure below the diagnostic threshold.
Data collected from eligible patients included demographics (age,
sex and race), referral source to the ED, presenting complaint,
medical history (prior diagnosis of BONHE, body mass index),
medications, length of stay in the ED and as an inpatient,
examination findings and investigations at the time of presentation
and follow-up. Blood pressures, including systolic and diastolic
blood pressures (SBP, DBP), visual acuity (VA), neurological
examination and cranial nerve status were extracted from medical
record. Visual field (Humphrey Field Analyzer, HFA, Carl Zeiss
Meditec, Dublin, California, USA), fundus imaging, OCT (Cirrus HD-
OCT, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, California, USA), neuroimaging
(MRI, CT and CTV), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood test results
were collected. VA was measured in the ED using Snellen charts
with pinhole testing when spectacle correction was unavailable, and
converted to Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS)
letter scores using a theoretical formula.6 Diagnosis and
management plan on discharge from the ED and/or the neurology/
ophthalmology ward were extracted from the medical record.
Outcomes of clinic reviews at the respective time intervals
(discharge to <3 months, 3–6 months, 6–9 months, 9–12 months,
>12 months) were examined.
For per-patient analysis, the eye with the worst VA was chosen as
the study eye. Snellen VA was converted to ETDRS letters. Mild
visual impairment is defined as a VA score of 65–75 (20/50 to
20/32) ETDRS letters or perimetric mean deviation (PMD) of −2 to
−7 dB on HFA. Moderate to severe IIH is defined as Frisén grade IV
or V papilloedema with PMD less than −7 dB. Median, range, IQR
and SD are reported.
Risk factors were analysed in relationship to the outcome of a
significant final diagnosis which was defined by (1) vision
impairment at presentation (defined as visual symptoms with either
impaired VA or abnormal confrontational visual field), (2)
hypertensive urgency (SBP >180 mm Hg or DBP >140 mm Hg), (3)
abnormal retinal findings (by ophthalmologist or ophthalmology
team), (4) abnormal neurological exam or (5) abnormal CT findings
in addition to IIH or increased intracranial pressure (ICP) findings.
Vision impairment at presentation was defined as patient-reported
visual symptoms (such as blurred vision, vision loss or visual
decline) accompanied by either: (1) impaired VA, defined as BCVA
worse than 6/6 (Snellen) or <85 ETDRS letters or (2) abnormal
confrontational visual field testing, including enlarged blind spot,
nasal, temporal, superior or inferior field defects, or diffusely
constricted fields. This definition was chosen to capture clinically
significant visual dysfunction in the ED setting that would warrant
urgent evaluation and potential admission.
Multivariable logistic regression modelling was performed to assess
the relationship between the relevant risk factors and a significant
final diagnosis; model estimates were summarised by ORs and 95%
CIs. A p<0.05 is considered statistically significant.
Results
Study cohort
A manual review of ED triage records spanning 6 years (2017–
2021) was conducted, analysing 357 225 ED visits. From this
review, 140 cases of IIH were identified. Of these, 40 patients had
an established history of IIH and were excluded. No patients in our
cohort had documented pre-existing amblyopia.
100 patients were recruited. Four were excluded due to lack of
medical records. The study cohort consists of 96 subjects. Most
were referred by optometrists (54) or general practitioners (17).
ED assessment, management and discharge plan
The median length of stay in the ED was 5 (IQR 3.45–6.12) hours.
Three patients were transferred to another hospital for further
inpatient management, and one patient was discharged against
medical advice and is excluded from further analysis below.
70 were female (76.1%). Median (IQR) age was 30.5 (IQR 24–43)
years (table 1).
Table 1. Demographics, referral patterns and clinical features
of ED patients.
Cases (excluding transfers)
Characteristic
Total
(N=92)
Admit
(n=54)
Discharge
(n=38)
P
value
Age in years, median
(Q1, Q3)
30.5 (24,
43)
36 (25.5,
43)
29 (23, 34.5) 0.069
Sex–female
70/92
(76.1)
39/54
(72.2)
31/38 (81.6) 0.431
Ethnicity–aboriginal
8/92
(8.7)
7/54 (13) 1/38 (2.6)
0.175
Presen