
Methods
Study design
This is a prospective, multi-site study comprising three inter-related
work packages: feasibility and acceptability of self-recording of vital
signs by patients (WP1), staff acceptability (WP2), and patient
acceptability of mobile health technology in their care (WP3). The
protocol was developed according to the Strengthening of Reporting
of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement [18].
Although reductions in crowding, improved utilisation of clinical
staff time, and improved completeness of vital‑sign documentation
are potential downstream benefits of patient‑recorded vital signs,
these outcomes will not be evaluated within this feasibility
protocol. The current study will focus on assessing usability,
acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary agreement between
smartphone‑derived and standard measurements. Evaluation of
system‑level impacts will form part of future research.
Setting
For WP1 and WP2, recruitment will take place in the largest of 3
EDs in George’s, Epsom and St Helier Hospital Group in London.
For WP3 (large scale survey) all 3 EDs will recruit participants.
Recruitment will take place from 01 June 2025–31 December 2026.
Participants
Participants will be identified by members of the clinical or
research teams working in any of the sites. Potential participants
will be screened using electronic medical records to exclude
patients in need of urgent medical assessment prior to approach.
Screened patients will be approached by members of the research
team and assessed against the eligibility criteria (Table 1). For WP2
(clinical staff questionnaire) we will email eligible staff members to
request participation.
Table 1. Eligibility criteria for the FacED feasibility
study.
WP1 (patients) WP2 (staff)
WP3 (patients
Inclusion
criteria
• ‘Walk-in’ adult
patients ≥ 18yrs
in ED or UTC
• Has access to
own
smartphone
• Willing and
able to give
informed
consent for
participation in
the study
• Clinical staff
(e.g., nurse,
doctor) working
in triage or
assessment area
of either ED or
UTC
• ‘Walk-in’ adult
patients ≥ 18yrs in
ED or UTC Has
access to own
smartphone Willing
and able to give
informed consent
for participation in
the study
Exclusion
criteria
• Clinical
condition
warranting
immediate
medical
attention (e.g.,
triage category
1)
• Unwilling to
complete
questionnaire
• Clinical staff not
involved in triage
or assessment
• Clinical condition
warranting
immediate medical
attention
Open in a new tab
For WP3, clinically stable participants will be approached in the ED
whilst waiting to be seen. Posters with QR codes in waiting rooms
at participating sites will also be used to allow patients to access the
survey directly.
Informed consent procedures
Written informed consent will be obtained from all participants in
WP1 prior to completing any study‑related procedures. For WP2
and WP3, consent will be obtained via a self‑completed electronic
process embedded within the online questionnaires. Participants
will review a digital information sheet and will confirm each
mandatory consent statement before proceeding. No verbal consent
procedures will be used. Research staff will not be able to view or
identify individual respondents for WP2 or WP3.
Study size
WP1: the smartphone vital signs recording work package will use
convenience sampling. Agreement between smartphone‑derived
vital signs and standard clinician‑measured vital signs will be
assessed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). The ICC is
the recommended metric when evaluating agreement between two
continuous measurement methods obtained under similar
conditions, as it quantifies the proportion of total variability that is
due to true agreement rather than measurement error. The sample
size for WP1 is based on achieving a precise estimate of the ICC,
assuming an expected ICC of 0.75 for agreement between
smartphone and standard measurements, a sample of 1,178
participants will be required to produce a 95% confidence interval
with a width of 0.025. By recruiting 1,500 participants, we will
allow for attrition and missing data while retaining sufficient
precision in the ICC estimate to plan future evaluative studies.
The purpose of this study is to determine feasibility and
acceptability; however, an estimate of measurement agreement is
necessary to inform future definitive studies. Therefore, the ICC will
not function as a co‑primary outcome, but rather as an important
secondary metric to understand the likely performance of the
technology under real‑world emergency care conditions.
WP2: uses a non-probability convenience sample of clinical staff
working in the assessment areas of each of the sites. We aim to
obtain a representative clinical staff (by profession and experience)
and will recruit between 20 and 40 members of staff.
WP3: uses a non-probability convenience sample of patients
presenting to the ED over the recruitment period. There is no
sample size calculation for the survey on digital health use in the
ED patients. Reason for attendance is not a factor in inclusion and
based on previous work using similar recruitment methods we
anticipate that 10,000 participants will be recruited over the study
duration.
Variables
The outcome variables to assess the study aims are as follows:
•  Feasibility: defined as the proportion of patients consented
who were able to complete the vital signs recording using
their smartphones. Feasibility also includes the proportion of
participants who were able to complete the process without
staff assistance and completeness of recorded measurements.
•  Acceptability of self-recorded vital signs (patients): affinity
for technology use – how comfortable, confident, and willing
participants are when using digital or technological tools; and
acceptability and patient experience of use of PPG application
