
Methods
Individuals with chronic knee pain (n ​= ​50) were purposively
recruited from the Knee Pain and related health In the Community
(KPIC) cohort to represent worsened, improved, or unchanged pain
or anxiety between baseline and one year later. Framework
analysis, a comparative form of thematic analysis, was used across
transcripts of semi-structured telephone interviews.
Results
Data were collapsed into themes of diagnosis, joint structure,
ageing, physical activity, weight management, and treatment.
Participants focused on biomechanical rather than psychological
pain mechanisms. Some participants attributed pain improvement
to increased and others to decreased physical activity. Participants
reported no change in their understanding of their pain during the
preceding year, but that their attitudes to pain, for example
acceptance, had changed. Participants reported that they and others
around them lacked understanding of their pain and why it did or
did not change.
Conclusion
People report a predominantly biomechanical understanding of why
their knee pain remains constant or changes over time. Clinicians
should support patients to develop a biopsychosocial understanding
of knee pain aligned to treatment across the range of biological,
psychological, and social modalities.
Keywords: Pain-mechanisms, Pain-progression, Knee osteoarthritis,
Anxiety, Beliefs
1. Introduction
One quarter of adults aged above 55 ​y experience significant knee
pain, of whom half have radiographic osteoarthritis (OA) [1].
Heterogeneous mechanisms underlie knee pain's diverse qualities.
OA pain is associated with pathology affecting articular cartilage,
subchondral bone, synovium, and peri-articular tissues, and may be
triggered or exacerbated by local biomechanical factors (peripheral
mechanisms). Knee pain is also affected by central nervous system
processing, associated with central sensitisation, cognition, anxiety
and mood (central mechanisms) [2].
People with chronic pain often hold strong biomedical beliefs,
attributing their pain to tissue damage [3,4]. Indeed, surgical
replacement of a ‘damaged’ joint can be very successful in relieving
pain. However, up to 20% continue to experience clinically
important pain even after surgery. Chronic pain is both a sensory
and emotional experience, and a biopsychosocial model has been
widely adopted by research and healthcare communities [5]. This
underpins currently recommended treatments for knee pain,
including strengthening and mind-body exercise, peripheral and
central-acting analgesics, surgery, and cognitive behavioural
therapy [[6], [7], [8]]. Treatment uptake, efficacy and satisfaction
require that beliefs are shared between patient and clinician [9].
Pain is a defining feature of OA for patients [10], but previous
research has focused on beliefs about OA as a joint disease
[4,11,12] Patients may attribute their OA to genes, being
overweight, ageing, manual work, extensive kneeling or lifting, past
sporting or occupational activities or trauma, or to unknown causes
or chance [12]. Many people explain their OA as something caused
by ‘wear and tear’ and loading of the joint, and believe that pain
would be cured by replacing lost cartilage, or relieved by reducing
joint loading [4,11,12]. Some believe that pain is caused by bone
surfaces rubbing together, or that an increase in pain severity is due
to structural progression to ‘bone on bone’ [4,11].
Scientific understanding of knee pain now incorporates many
mechanisms beyond biomechanical factors in the joint. Increasing
structural change might indeed be associated with increasing pain
[13], although, for the individual, pain might improve irrespective
of structural OA progression. Increases in pain may be associated
also with anxiety or low mood, although, again, increasing distress
is not inevitably accompanied by an increase in pain [14]. How
people understand their knee pain might therefore often diverge
from scientific evidence.
It is currently unknown how individuals make sense of their knee
pain as it persists or changes over time, or whether their
understanding might change as they experience changing pain.
Inappropriate beliefs might contribute to chronic pain and be, of
themselves, targets for interventions such as cognitive behavioural
therapy [15]. Knowledge of how people understand their knee pain
could identify information needs that, if addressed, might facilitate
treatment and ultimately reduce the burden of chronic pain.
We conducted an interview-based study to investigate three topics
from the perspective of individuals with knee pain: (1) their
understanding of the mechanisms that drive their knee pain and
whether their understanding converged with those of healthcare
professionals and others with whom they interact; (2) their
understanding of the reasons for persistent or changing pain over
the past year; and (3) how their understanding had changed over
the past year, regarding the mechanisms of their ongoing pain. We
further sought to identify whether study findings were consistent
across individuals with persistent or changing pain and anxiety.
2. Methods
2.1. Study design and procedures
This qualitative study used semi-structured interviews and a
combined approach to framework analysis, a comparative form of
thematic analysis, to develop themes both inductively from the
views shared by the individual, and deductively from existing
literature [16]. Ethical approval was from the University of
Nottingham Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Research
Ethics Committee (11–1704), the study was sponsored and received
institutional approval from the University of Nottingham. All
participants gave informed consent to the work. Interview guides
were designed in partnership with individuals with knee pain from
the Pain Centre Versus Arthritis Patient and Public Involvement and
Engagement (PPIE) group. Concordance with the consolidated
criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ) [17] is
presented in Supplementary Table 1.
2.2. Participants
Participants were from the Knee Pain and Related Health in the
Community Study (KPIC), a prospective cohort study designed to
investigate mechanisms and associations of knee pain in
community-dwelling adults [18]. KPIC is a sample of men and
women aged 40 years and over, located on the UK General
Practitioner (GP) register in the East Midlands, UK. KPIC recruited
9506 people at baseline irrespective of knee pain status, of whom
2512 reported pain in or around knee for most days in the past
month. Of these, 1471 also completed questionnaires at the 1 year
follow-up [18].
Eligibility for the current study required that KPIC participants had
reported chronic knee pain at baseline by responding positively to:
‘Have you had knee pain on most days of this past month?’ and ‘Has
your knee pain lasted more than 3 months?’ Eligibility also required
completion of Numerical Rating Scores for pain and Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Score (HADS) anxiety subscale [19] at
baseline and 1-year follow up, and documented willingness to be
contacted for research studies. Participants were excluded if they
reported an inflammatory musculoskeletal condition (e.g.,
rheumatoid arthritis), reported at the 1-year KPIC follow-up acute
knee pain (<3 months) attributed to trauma, or could not
communicate in spoken English.
Invitations to participate and a participant information sheet were
sent by post. We purposively sampled participants based on
prospectively collected baseline and 1-year follow up KPIC
questionnaire responses. To ensure that the study sample
represented a range of individuals with persistent or changing knee
pain and anxiety, interested participants were invited according to a
3 ​× ​3 ​cell recruitment matrix, representing all combinations of 3
levels of change (worsened, unchanged, or improved) for the 2
characteristics of pain or anxiety.
Participants were invited to interviews in waves, with progressive
enrichment in successive waves of matrix groups that contained
interviews from small numbers of participants from previous waves.
Recruitment to interviews of KPIC participants in each study
subgroup continued until a target number of interviews per group
was reached (n ​= ​9), or further KPIC participants were not
identified in that group. All interviews were conducted by one
researcher (JR) and overall recruitment was discontinued when the
researcher reported that no new information was emerging across
study subgroups (data-saturation).
2.3. Data collection
