
Methods
Fourteen participants, comprising medical students and
neurosurgical residents, were recorded performing an EVD on a
trainer head. Five panoramic cameras were installed within the
simulation suite. The model employed convolutional neural
networks to track anatomical landmarks and assess task completion.
Quantification of the learning curve was achieved by aggregating
scores across three phases: preparation, insertion, and closing.
Additional metrics included fluidity, a proxy for surgical finesse.
Results
The model successfully itemized parameters that characterize EVD
placement. The study demonstrated a clear learning curve in EVD
placement. The overall scores were 64.4/126 (51.1%), 99.6/126
(79%), and 113/126 (89.7%) for the students, junior residents, and
senior residents ( p  < 0.0001). Significant improvements were
observed in the preparation, insertion, and closing phases. The
mean scores for preparation were 16.4/37 (44.3%), 25.6/37 (69.2),
and 30.5/37 (82.4) for the students, junior residents, and senior
residents ( p  < 0.0001). The mean scores for insertion were
26.2/44 (59.5%), 37.8/44 (85.9%), and 38.5/44 (87.5%) for the
students, junior residents, and senior residents ( p  = 0.026). The
mean scores during closing were 13/25 (52%), 22.2/25 (88.8%),
and 25/25 (100%) for the students, junior residents, and senior
residents ( p  = 0.0034). Fluidity improved significantly with
training level ( p  = 0.0006).
Conclusion
Our platform effectively quantified the learning curve associated
with EVD placement, underscoring the importance of objective
feedback and AI's potential to facilitate skill acquisition.
Keywords: artificial intelligence, vision systems, neurosurgery,
skull base, EVD, machine learning
Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) has the capacity to transform
neurosurgery. The coming decade could see AI significantly impact
diagnosis, treatment selection, surgical planning, and surgical
education. AI can be trained in visual detection to assess specific
performance metrics for medical students and residents. 1
Neurosurgical educators are constantly searching for novel methods
to ensure that trainees are evolving accordingly. In light of duty
hour restrictions, there was an increased number of complications
reported on neurosurgical services. 2 3 4 AI and machine learning
(ML) could augment the current educational paradigm to help
supplement neurosurgical trainees' learning experiences. To date, AI
in postgraduate surgical training has been limited to virtual reality
tasks with narrow metrics. 5 Its limited application has been
attributed to AI lacking the agility to passively integrate into the
workflow for students, professors, and physicians. 6 7
A potential role for AI and ML in neurosurgery is the assessment
and grading of highly reproducible procedures (e.g., suturing or
lumbar punctures) and ultimately applying it to tumor resection or
aneurysm clipping. 8 Gonzalez-Romo et al 9 quantified a difference
in the fidelity of hand motion in micro-suturing as categorized by
experience level. However, no study has accurately translated
“surgical finesse” into an AI model; the components responsible for
the fluidity of a participant are elusive and are not easily captured
by binary checklists. Current milestone evaluations rely on
subjective assessment by senior staff. With the rapid advancements
in vision systems and increased availability of versatile generative
models, there is an opportunity for AI to transform medical
education. We hypothesized that AI-driven vision systems would
accurately quantify the efficiency and fluidity of moves during a
procedure and differentiate between years of training.
Here, we incorporated multiple overhead cameras equipped with a
proprietary platform to quantify the learning curve associated with
the placement of an external ventricular drain (EVD) on a trainer
cranial model. This study was conducted as a noncommercial,
proof-of-concept demonstration of AI-assisted assessment in a
simulated environment.
Methods
Motion detection was achieved using an ML model capable of
tracking landmarks without sensors. The foundational layer of our
stack is composed of hardware (Synology Inc. cameras), followed by
AI training and analytics (Appraiseye Inc. proprietary software).
The model underwent training using a sequence of convolutional
neural network models (CNN): a class of neural networks that
incorporate convolution (specialized mathematical operations for
processing grid-like data). The CNN has three layers: a
convolutional layer, a pooling layer, and a final layer that performs
a dot product between the restricted portion of the receptive field of
a kernel matrix with learnable parameters.
The stack consisted of a common hardware and software layer ( Fig.
1 ). The neural network layer consisted of object detection and
segmentation models. Certain instruments were identified using the
existing One Shot, YOLO, and the COCO datasets. MediaPipe was
used for pose estimation.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Schematic representation of AI stack architecture.
The model identified the existence of a human with a head and
torso and subsequently located human joints (including 22 hand
landmarks). Existing Python 3.6 libraries (Pytorch, YOLO, Pyplot)
were applied to assess binary task completion (i.e., wearing a mask,
wearing a gown, and creating a burr hole) where qualitative scores
of 1 or 0 could be applied. Time intervals with loss of tracking data
were not included in performance calculations. Object detection
was used in binary observations, while object segmentation was
used in the efficiency of motion to identify various objects and their
intersection ( Supplementary Fig. S1 , available in the online
version only). To calculate the drill metrics, the drill bounding box
was reduced to a line by making the box width 4 pixels; skull
segmentation was used to identify the contours of the skull. Once
the drill contacted the skull, a tangent was measured along the skull
from the point of intersection → the angle was calculated using tan 
= (a2.b1a1.b2)/(b1.b2 + a1.a2).
Model Validation
Supervised learning requires labeling large data sets to train neural
networks with the goal of obtaining a model with predictive
capability. We verified the accuracy of the annotation by
individually watching each participant through a single
macroscopic view (camera #4).
The scoring criteria were derived from best practice guidelines for
EVD placement. Although detailed annotation was performed to
train and verify the accuracy of AI-driven event detection, no
independent validation of procedure quality by a senior
neurosurgeon was conducted. Future iterations should incorporate
independent evaluations by neurosurgeons to validate AI scores
against outcomes.
Participants
Fourteen participants were visually recorded completing an EVD
catheter insertion from start to finish between September and
October 2023. The cohorts were categorized according to
experience level: five fourth-year medical students, five junior
neurosurgical residents, and four senior neurosurgical residents.
Junior residents were categorized as PGY-1 to PGY-3; senior
residents as PGY-4 to PGY-8. The participants provided written and
verbal consent to be visually recorded and assessed by AI. This
study was exempted by the Institutional Review Board pursuant to
Title 45 Code of Federal Regulations Part 46.101.
EVD Procedure
The simulated EVD placement was achieved by providing the
participants with the equipment required to complete the task
(surgical gloves, EVD kit, and EVD catheter) on an artificial trainer
head (Artisan Medical Displays). 10 The participants were given a
brief clinical scenario analogous to an Objective Structured Clinical
Examination, performing an EVD from start to finish: gowning,
gloving, kit unpacking onto a sterile field, drill installation, catheter
insertion, tunnelling and suturing the drain in place.
Ventriculostomy accuracy was assessed visually through a viewing
window built into the trainer cranial model. Upon insertion, the tip
of the catheter was confirmed within the simulated ventricle. Five
panoramic cameras were installed in strategic locations within the
simulation suite (birds-eye-view, equipment view, and oblique
procedure views; Fig. 2 ).
Fig. 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Select images from the project setup. ( A ) Overview of the
procedural area. ( B ) Lateral view of the positioned head. ( C )
Oblique camera view demonstrating hand landmark tracking.
Quantification of Scores
To quantify the performance of the participants as they completed
the procedure, we trained the model to assign points depending on
whether a task was performed ( Table 1 ). Quantification of the
learning curve between the cohorts was achieved by accumulating
the points at each phase of the procedure: preparation, insertion,
and closing. The algorithm extrapolated a checklist from a best
practice guideline on EVD placement. 11 In qualitative tasks, scores
of 1 or 0 were assigned; that is, 1 point was assigned for putting on
a facemask during preparation or 1 point for tunnelling the catheter
during closing. By contrast, during tasks with more granularity,
quantitative scores of 1 to 10 were assigned; that is, during
preparation, scoring for organization of the EVD kit onto the sterile
instrument table was determined by how ergonomically the
participant had arranged the necessary tools.
Table 1. Algorithm used to score quantitative categories;
qualitative categories were assigned 0 or 1.
Gloves
Kit
organization
Drill
config.
duration
Preparation
duration
Catheter
insert
duration
Drill
angle
Placem
attem
1 = 
Gloves
rip or
break
sterility
>3
times
1 = Tools
break
sterility; 8
components
removed
1 = 
Installation 
> 40 s; bit
installed
1 = 
Duration
>420 s
1 = 
Insertion
>60 s
1 = 
Drill
<50 
degrees
1 = >
attemp
2 = 
Break
sterility
3 times
2 = 8
components
removed
2 = 
Installation
>40 s; no
bit
2 =