
Materials and methods
Field study and data collection
This field study was conducted in three provinces of Türkiye to
collect a weed dataset reflecting real field conditions and to support
precision farming. These three provinces are Balıkesir (Kepsut
Hotaşlar and Nusret), Ankara (Batıkent, Başayaş, Gölbaşı Hacılar
and Bala Afşar), and Aksaray (Çatalsu, Kurtuluş, Lalebağı, Kederli
and Armutlu) villages. Figure 2 shows all the fields where the
photographs were taken and a detailed map of the study areas.
While collecting the data, efforts were made to create environments
that were as similar as possible to real field conditions. No
controlled testing environment was created. The entire dataset was
collected from real agricultural environments showing various soil
types, light conditions, damaged plants, and irrigated/dry soil
conditions common in open-field tomato cultivation in Türkiye. The
collected data has been gathered in a heterogeneous manner, and
this method represents real field conditions, enabling the dataset to
provide more realistic results.
Figure 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Map of fields where weeds and tomato plants were obtained.
To obtain realistic ground-level data, an iPhone 11, iPhone 14 Pro
Max, and a professional-grade DJI Mavic 3 Pro drone camera were
used. We obtained 32,607 images. This gave us a total of 44,165
bounding box annotations. 15,207 images (46.42%) were obtained
with the drone.
To make the model more realistic and ensure the dataset yielded
realistic results, the dataset was collected under different lighting
and environmental conditions, such as morning, midday, and
afternoon light. Weed data were captured at all growth stages, from
small seedlings to adult seedlings. The dataset also included
samples that were weathered, rotten, hail damaged muddy,
withered, and taken from different angles (e.g., top-down, side, and
oblique views). The intention is to make the dataset less
homogeneous, and therefore more realistic and easier for the model
to generalize to real agriculture settings. These realistic approaches
could deteriorate the performance of the model on precision, recall
and mAP. This was a deliberate decision to obviate the use of
controlled experiment accuracy and reflect practical field
performance (Maxwell et al., 2021).
The data, belonging to each class of tomato or weed, was bounding
boxes annotations using IrfanView64 software. Species
identifications and bounding box annotations were created while
verifying agricultural weed species. The images were re-checked,
particularly to minimize mislabeling of morphologically similar
species. 44,165 bounding boxes annotations objects were identified
in 32,607 images.
To prevent potential confusion due to long scientific names during
training, each plant species was assigned a unique number. These
numbers are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 respectively, and they have made
the training process more organized.
The classes were defined as follows:
Table 1 shows that 44,165 labels were created on 32,607 images.
The labeling process is based on the scientific classification of plant
species. Weed species with similar characteristics in the field were
placed in the same class. This method was designed so that the
model would not have problems with visual differences in different
field conditions and would generalize well at the class level.
Figure 3 shows the number of visual and limiting box labels for
weed species.
Table 1.
Alphabetical codes assigned to weed species, along with the number
of labels and images for each class.
Class Scientific name
Number of
label
Number of
images
0
Acroptilon repens (L.)
3.486
2.593
1
Amaranthus retroflexus
L.
4.567
4.527
