
Methods
Ethics
This study was approved by the Conjoint Health Research Ethics
Board of the University of Calgary (REB#:21-1497v4). Written
informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to
enrollment. Subjects were recruited and tested from July 1 2024 to
September 1 2024. The individual in this manuscript (Fig 1) has
given written informed consent (as outlined in PLOS consent form)
to publish these case details.
Fig 1. Experimental setup and validation experiment.
[image]
Open in a new tab
A: Camera placement, with approximate distances relative to the
left edge of the walkway. B: Experimental validation of step
placements, using markers placed on the feet, sacrum and head. C:
Validation of markerless data: step length, width and walking
speed.
Experimental designs
We performed two experiments. First we established the validity of
the opensource markerless motion capture system (FreeMoCap:
Matthis et al., 2022) to record clinically-relevant metrics—step
width, step length, and walking speed—by comparing markerless
foot placement and the resulting step times and durations, to those
from an active optical motion capture system commonly used in
biomechanical studies (Phasespace Inc.). Next, we performed
Functional Gait Assessment on Older adults [1]. We placed the
analysis code in a repository for use by practitioners interested in
performing their own analysis.
Methods
The markerless motion capture system used 3 (Jetaku Inc; Amazon)
web cameras placed laterally to the walking direction along a 6
meters distance which is used in FGA (Fig 1A). We also marked the
hallway to denote a 6 m walkway, with a width of 0.3 m. A desktop
PC (2018; 3.4 GHz; 4 Cores; 16 GB Ram) was used to record and
process data. Total added cost of the cameras and USB extension
cables was less than $200 (CAD).
Experiment sessions required approximately 20 minutes of
preparation time to 1) physically set-up cameras, 2) perform
calibration and 3) compute capture volume orientation. To calibrate
the system, the markerless motion capture system optimally
estimates the 3D position of web cameras, and accounts for visual
distortion of the camera optics. This is done by simultaneously
recording video data from a Charuco board—a single black-and-
white calibration image with known checkerboard pattern and
dimension. To accommodate a 6m walking area that FGA requires,
a large poster (square size: 15.7 cm) was used. Custom software
optimizes the 3D position of the cameras to minimize the 3D-
positional error of the detected checkerboard patterns (or “bundle
adjustment [25]”). The software [24] reports the number of full
boards detected from each camera, and provides some information
about calibration accuracy; practically, we ensured that at least 400
boards were recorded for from each of the web cameras for each of
our recording sessions. This calibration process took 2 minutes of
Charuco board positioning, and about 10 minutes of compute (no
GPU acceleration; CPU processing only on our 2018 machine). To
perform capture volume orientation, subjects stood in three
locations to define a simple coordinate system: 1) at the beginning
of the walkway; 2) at +5m (forward) along the pathway; and 3) at
1 m right of the walkway. This procedure defined the plane of the
walking area, allowing rotation of the recorded data. It also allowed
us to perform linear correction for calibration bias, as these known
magnitudes allowed rescaling data collected along each axis.
Typically, FreeMoCap’s calibration procedure resulted in less than
5% error in absolute estimate of walkway length.
During data processing, key-point software makes estimates of the
position of joints and other points of interest on the body (Google
Mediapipe). The software performs a lowpass filter (25 Hz) to
reduce the effect of joint misestimation, motion blur, and other
artefacts.
Experiment 1: Validation
We performed our first experiment to determine the validity of the
markerless motion capture system to compute three measures that
are necessary and sufficient to automate FGA: step length, step
width, and walking speed. To determine the accuracy of computer
vision methods, we used marker-based motion capture and
collected 6 markers per person to capture feet, torso, and head
position of subjects (N = 3). While the markerless system we used
reports several foot keypoints, throughout this study we will use the
term “foot position” and “foot speed” to refer to Mediapipe’s
detected “heel position” marker and its derivative. We
simultaneously recorded walking trials of a 4 m distance with both
systems, under two conditions chosen to span the range of
empirically-observed step widths: normal preferred step width, and
a ‘wide’ condition where subjects were asked to place footsteps
along the edges of the 0.3 m marked path. We performed three
replications of each condition.
We time-aligned the two systems by determining the maximum
cross-correlation (MATLAB: normxcorr2) of anterior-posterior (AP)
foot speed between the two extracted walking bouts (Fig 2A). For
each trial, we cross-correlated (MATLAB: normxcorr2), the
summation of each system’s (markerless and markered) left and
right foot speed (Fig 2B) and computed the maximum value of the
cross correlation. This cross-correlation was done using linearly-
interpolated data from the markerless system data (recorded at 30
Hz) to match the markered system’s sample rate (240 Hz). To
spatially align the two systems, we subtracted the initial (T = 0)
position of each left foot to register the two systems at the
beginning of the walking bout.
Fig 2. Measurement of gait parameters.
[image]
Open in a new tab
(A) Anterior-posterior (AP) left and right foot speed was used to
identify walking bouts automatically. (B) Cross-correlation of the
summed AP absolute foot speeds with a starting-bout template were
used to extract gait start and end times. (C) The regions where foot
speed was below a threshold of 0.15 m/s were identified as stance
phase, and the middle of each step’s stance phase was taken as mid-
stance. (D) Head speed was computed as the time derivative of the
average position of the ear and nose markers locations. (E and F)
step length and width vectors were computed based on the mid-
stance instants of consecutive steps.
To detect left and right stance periods, Foot speed was low-pass
filtered at 3 Hz, and regions where foot speed was below the speed
threshold of 0.15 m/s were identified. The average position of that
stance region (the midstance instant, Carlisle and Kuo, 2023) was
taken as the footstep location (Fig 2C–2F). We computed step
length and width as the distance between two consecutive footstep
locations in forward and lateral directions respectively (Fig 2F).
We measured head speed (Fig 2D) as differentiating (time
derivative) the forward position of the head marker (located
centrally in the back of the head via headband), and for the
markerless system we defined it as the time derivative of the
average forward position of the left ear, right ear, and nose
keypoints.
Experiment 2: FGA
Older adult subjects (N = 5; mean age: 69 years; Table 1) were
