
Methods) creates four imaging planes normal to the optical imaging
axes of each of the four microscopes of the CortexCAM22.
Figure 1. The CortexCAM: A compact microscope for cortex-
wide cellular imaging.
[image]
Open in a new tab
a) Photograph of the CortexCAM and the corresponding polyhedral
coverglass implant
b) Isometric CAD view of the CortexCAM with arrows demarcating
the excitation, emission, focusing sub-assemblies. Bottom:
polyhedral coverglass implant sub assembly.
c) Cross-sectional view of the CortexCAM: Right half cross-section
shows the ray-traces for excitation and emission light paths. The left
half cross-section shows the individual opto-electronic components.
d) United States Airforce (USAF) test target imaged using a single
imaging module of the CortexCAM. Inset expands and shows group
6 and 7.
e) Modulation Transfer Function (MTF) curve approximated from
experimental values obtained using micro-objective lenses used in
each CortexCAM imaging module.
f) 10 μm fluorescence microbeads in a phantom implant imaged
using the CortexCAM. Inset shows a small region of microbeads
imaged from one imaging field of view (FOV).
g) Average light intensity variation across individual microbeads
indicated in the inset (f).
The parallelized microscope architecture results in an array of four
microscopes, each independently imaging contiguous FOVs at
cellular resolution, that cumulatively give a coverage of >48mm2
area of the dorsal cortex. The overall footprint of the CortexCAM is
approximately 55 x 52 x 45 mm3, and results in a device weight of
49.1 g including the tethers. The two posterior microscopes image
through cranial windows, each covering an area of 4.10 x 4.10
mm2, encompassing higher order visual cortex, somatosensory
cortex and retrosplenial cortex brain regions in both hemispheres.
Correspondingly, each of the anterior microscopes images 8.405
mm2 area comprising motor and prefrontal cortices (Fig. 2a)
Cumulatively, >48 mm2 of the dorsal cortex can be imaged. Each
microscope within the CortexCAM has a working distance of 15.2
mm.
Figure 2. Cortex-wide cellular resolution imaging in head-fixed
mouse.
[image]
Open in a new tab
a) Widefield image of a Cux2-CRE-ERT2 x Ai1623 mouse implanted
with the convex polyhedral double glass coverslip implant. White
lines indicate an overlaid brain atlas59.
b) A composite max projection image of 4 simultaneously imaged
FOVs using the CortexCAM.
c) Expanded view of FOV 3 showing footprints of the extracted cell
regions (top) and two further expansions on the two rectangular
insets marked as orange and blue in the first expanded view
(bottom)
d) Top: Pseudo color heatmaps of normalized DFF traces for all
neurons imaged in FOV 3 (top) along with velocity of the
locomotion on the treadmill. Bottom: representative Ca2+ DFF time
series of 20 randomly selected neurons.
e) Distribution of peak DFF (<95th percentile) of all neurons
imaged in each FOV (n = 3 mice).
f) Number of neurons recorded in each FOV (n = 3 mice).
A third distinction is a kinemantic clamping mechanism (Fig. 1b)
built into the bottom surface of the CortexCAM. The clamping
mechanism allows mice, implanted with a convex polyhedral
double glass coverslip cranial window, to be docked directly to the
compact microscope unlike headfixation to a post over a treadmill.
CortexCAM Optical Characterization
Each excitation and emission light paths within the CortexCAM is
independent, and is designed to be identical to the other paths with
