
Methods
Analysis of Cellular Metabolites
MRC5 primary human fibroblasts were switched to DMEM with 25
mM 13C6-glucose for 5 or 60 min. The medium was aspirated; cells
were washed quickly with ice-cold PBS, and metabolites were
extracted with 50:30:20 methanol/acetonitrile/water. Samples
(triplicates) were applied to liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) using a 15 cm × 4.6 mm ZIC-pHILIC (Merck
Millipore) column fitted with a guard on a Thermo Ultimate 3000
HPLC. A gradient of decreasing acetonitrile (with 20 mM
ammonium carbonate as the aqueous phase) was used to elute
metabolites into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Data were
acquired in wide scan negative mode. In order to generate mzML
files, the command “msconvert_all()” was run that uses the
msconvert utility of Proteowizard11,12 to generate separate positive
and negative mode mzML files.
Software Description
Input File Format
AssayR uses the R package mzR to extract chromatograms from files
in mzML format.
Config File
A configuration file in .tsv format is associated with each analysis
(Figure 2). This file specifies the m/z value and the retention time
(RT) window of each metabolite of interest as well as the maximum
number of isotopologues to analyze (split into 13C, 15N, and 2H).
For config file setup purposes, the full retention time range can be
selected (e.g., Initial config file in Figure 2) as well as default values
for the width of the peak detection filter (“seconds”; see Extracted
Ion Chromatogram Generation and Peak Detection below) and
intensity threshold. An “interactive” option is also included so that
the user can opt out of the iterative peak detection step for any
metabolite, for instance, if it is known that the peak is always
picked correctly by the current settings. Isotopologue selection is
simply a numerical input for 13C, 15N, or 2H, and combined
isotopes can be selected: all possible isotopologues are analyzed.
Figure 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Examples of Initial and Final config files. Typical default values are
given in the Initial config file. “seconds” refers to the width of the
peak detection filter and not the peak width. The red box highlights
parameters that are modified during interactive peak picking. The
blue box highlights the simple isotopologue number input.
Extracted Ion Chromatogram Generation and Peak
Detection
A more detailed description accompanies the R package code,
which is available at https://gitlab.com/jimiwills/assay.R. Briefly, a
row from the configuration table (Figure 2), representing an
analyte, is read and the configured mz ranges (combining m/z,
ppm, and isotope settings) are extracted from mzML files via the
mzR package. Interpolation is used to standardize the retention
times across these chromatograms, and the maximal
chromatographic profile is taken forward for peak detection. This
means that a peak only needs to be present in a single sample for a
single isotope for that peak to be detected and measured across the
whole context. The use of combined isotopologues (Figure 3A) for
metabolite peak identification is particularly important when a mix
of labeled and unlabeled samples are analyzed or for samples where
the labeling in a given metabolite is saturated, and therefore, the
monoisotopic m/z value would be inappropriate for metabolite peak
identification.
Figure 3.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Peak detection in AssayR. (A) Peak detection (shaded blue) is
specified for each metabolite based upon all isotopologues in all
samples. (B) Example of peak detection (blue shading) despite poor
chromatography. (C) AssayR enables split peaks to be detected
separately (shaded green/yellow) or together. Shaded areas are
detected and quantified.
The retention time minimum and maximum from the configuration
table are used to select a region of the chromatogram on which
peak detection will be performed. A Mexican hat filter is used with
the filter function in R to translate the chromatogram and to set
start and end indices for each detected peak. The indices are used to
define the range to be summed to generate peak area measurements
for each chromatogram. Individual peaks are marked (in blue),
where more than one peak is identified within a metabolite
retention time window; the peaks are separated and shaded in
different colors (e.g., green/yellow for 2 peaks; Figure 3C), to assist
with peak curation. The interactive peak picking procedure then
allows simple alteration of detection parameters through an
intuitive query-based format. Alteration of the width of the Mexican
hat (“seconds” column in the config file) enables most peaks to be
picked, even when the chromatography is poor, such as when
measuring glucose on a ZIC-pHILIC column (Figure 3B). Split peaks
can also be selected as a single metabolite or two peaks by
alteration of the hat width (Figure 3C). The minimum and
maximum m/z values, the hat filter width, and the peak detection
threshold are all updated during the interactive peak picking
process. Once the user is satisfied with the result, the updated
parameters are written back to the configuration file (e.g., Final
config file in Figure 2) and the peak areas are saved for output in
the data .csv file.
Output
The primary output from AssayR is a .csv file with samples
separated by column and metabolites/isotopologues separated by
row. Images of the extracted ion chromatograms generated during
peak detection are exported for recording metabolite identification
and quality control: these images are generated even when the
software is run without interactive peak curation. Stacked bar
charts of absolute and relative peak intensity are produced for each
metabolite, allowing quick and easy visualization of the data. These
reveal variance between samples and allow for quick identification
of possible outlier samples (as outlined below). A representative
analysis of 13C6-glucose tracing in primary human fibroblasts is
presented in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Glycolytic and related stable isotope tracing of 13C6-glucose
metabolism quantified by AssayR. Relative (percentage) stacked bar
charts of triplicates are shown as produced by AssayR (absolute
stacked bar charts and EICs are also produced automatically).
MRC-5 fibroblasts were pulsed for 5 or 60 min with 13C6-glucose in
triplicate. Abbreviations: Glu (glucose), G6P (glucose 6-phosphate),
F6P (fructose 6-phosphate), FBP (fructose 1,6-bisphosphate), PGA
(3-phosphoglyceraldehyde), DHAP (dihydroxyacetone phosphate),
2/3-PG (2-/3-phosphoglycerate), PEP (phosphoenolpyruvate), Pyr
(pyruvate), Ala (alanine), Lac (lactate), Cit/Iso (citrate/isocitrate).
Comparison with XCMS
A popular chromatographic approach in metabolomics is the use of
ZIC-pHILIC columns at high pH9 because they capture a wide range
of metabolites, including most of the organic acids of central carbon
metabolism. However, the chromatographic performance of these
matrices can be poor, especially in comparison to reversed-phase
chromatographic approaches. Variability in peak shape can be
pronounced as some metabolites can interact with the matrix in
more than one way, and this can lead to spread (e.g., glucose in
Figure 3B) or separated peaks. This variability can be more
pronounced if methanol is used during sample loading due to
additional surface effects of the solvent. Using the metabolomic
data set from MRC5 primary human fibroblasts pulsed with 13C6-
glucose, we analyzed glycolytic and related metabolites with
AssayR (Figure 4) and XCMS. As described above, the
chromatography of glucose is poor and XCMS did not pick any of
the isotopologues, whereas AssayR showed almost full labeling in
all samples (Figure 5A). While fructose 6-phosphate was well
resolved and accurately picked by both packages, the monoisotopic
glucose 6-phosphate peak had an overlapping isobaric peak with
slightly later retention time (Figure 5B). During the peak detection
stage in AssayR, it was clear that these were mixed metabolites
because some of the extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) matched
the first peak only whereas some matched both peaks (Figure 5B).
