
Experimental procedure and stimuli
The subjects were sat in a dimly-lit isolated room. Two different
experimental set ups were performed: (1) Spontaneous EEG of the
subject were recorded for 4 min for “eyes open” and 4 min for “eyes
closed” conditions. (2) The EEG was recorded upon application of
simple light stimuli for analyzing simple evoked oscillations. A
visual sensory paradigm was used in the experiments. Stimulation
consisted of a white screen with 10 cd/cm2 luminance. A series of
60 stimulation signals (1,000 ms duration) were applied randomly,
with the inter-stimulus intervals varying between 3 and 7 s.
EEG recording
EEG was recorded by using the BrainAmp EEG amplifier, Brain
Vision Recorder software (Brainproducts, Munich, Germany), and
the BrainCap electrode cap at 30 positions. The EEG was amplified
by means of a BrainAmp with band limits of 0.01–250 Hz. The EEG
was digitized on-line at a sampling rate of 500 Hz. All electrode
impedances were less than 10 kΩ. In order to maintain a constant
level of vigilance, a researcher controlled on-line the subject and
the EEG traces; The subject was verbally alerted any time there
were signs of behavioral and/or EEG drowsiness. Two linked
earlobe electrodes (A1 + A2) served as references. The EOG from
the medial upper and lateral orbital rim of the right eye was also
registered. For the reference electrodes and EOG recordings, Ag–
AgCl electrodes were used. The EEG and EOG signals were visually
scored and portions of the data that contained aberrant eye
movements, muscle movements or artifacts were removed.
EEG analysis
Spontaneous EEG analysis
The spontaneous EEG was recorded for 4 min eyes closed and 4 min
eyes open conditions and subsequent analyses were performed
separately for eyes closed and eyes open conditions. The recorded
EEG data were analyzed and fragmented off-line in consecutive
epochs of 1 s. The digital FFT-based power spectrum analysis was
performed. (10% Hanning windowing function was evaluated in
order to calculate alpha frequency peak). These power values were
averaged across the epochs of a given trial. The standard frequency
band of interest was alpha (8–13 Hz). The maximum individual
alpha frequency value for each subject was included, for the
purpose of statistical analysis, as the maximum individual alpha
frequency value of that subject.
Visual evoked oscillations analysis
The epochs (between 0 and 1,000 ms) of each subject were
averaged and then the digital FFT-based power spectrum analysis
was performed. (10% Hanning windowing function was evaluated
in order to calculate the alpha frequency peak). The standard
frequency band of interest was alpha (8–13 Hz). The maximum
individual alpha frequency value for each subject was included, for
the purpose of statistical analysis, as the maximum individual alpha
frequency value of that subject.
Statistics
SPSS was used for statistical analysis. A repeated measure ANOVA
was used to determine the statistical significance of differential
alpha responses over different conditions, locations; and between
patients and controls. Two separate ANOVA were used for two
different experimental set ups (Spontaneous EEG, Visual Evoked
Oscillations): In the analysis of spontaneous EEG alpha power
differences, repeated measures of ANOVA included the between-
subjects factor as healthy subjects and euthymic patients; repeated
measure ANOVA included the within-subject factors as condition
(eyes open, eyes closed); location (Frontal, Central, Temporal 1 (T7–
T8), Temporal 2 (TP7–TP8), Parietal, Occipital) and hemisphere
(right, left). In the analysis of Visual Evoked alpha power
differences, repeated measures of ANOVA included the between-
subjects factor as healthy subjects and euthymic patients; repeated
