
Methodology, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Tom Piercy
, Kiera L Adams
Kiera L Adams
3Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom
Methodology, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Kiera L Adams
3, Connor T Keating
Connor T Keating
3Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom
Methodology, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Connor T Keating
3, Rachel Tam
Rachel Tam
3Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom
Methodology, Writing review editing
Find articles by Rachel Tam
3, David Plans
David Plans
4Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway University of London,
Egham, United Kingdom
Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by David Plans
4, Davide Morelli
Davide Morelli
5Department of Engineering Science, Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Davide Morelli
5, Adam Cunningham
Adam Cunningham
6Independent Researcher, London, United Kingdom
Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Adam Cunningham
6, Geoffrey Bird
Geoffrey Bird
3Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom
7Centre for Research in Autism and Education, Institute of
Education, University College London, London, United Kingdom
8European Research College London, London, United Kingdom
9European Research University, Ostrava, Czechia
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Supervision,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Geoffrey Bird
3,7,8,9
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13261906  PMID: 42293958
Abstract
In 2021 a new measure for the assessment of cardiac interoceptive
accuracy—the Phase Adjustment Task (PAT)—was developed that
overcomes several limitations of existing methods and can be
administered using a smartphone application. In this report, we
describe several refinements to the PAT. These include: (1)
triggering tones from the detection of the heartbeat via the
smartphone camera, rather than using an algorithm for predicting
the occurrence of the next heartbeat; (2) technical amendments to
enable implementation on iPhones with multiple cameras; (3)
changes to instructions and (4) changes to the collection of
confidence ratings to improve participant understanding and the
utility of confidence ratings for interpretation of results; (5) the
introduction of new practice trials to improve clarity; (6) changes to
the analysis approach to identify cardiac phase-based heartbeat
perceivers; (7) a review of the use of continuous scores; (8) a
reanalysis of data comparing PAT performance in supervised
laboratory settings and unsupervised remote settings using the new
analysis method, and (9) the implementation of additional measures
to discourage participants from checking their pulse. In this paper
we outline our justification for these changes and provide details of
where researchers can access the materials required for
implementing the PAT and analyzing data. Finally, we provide
further recommendations for implementation.
Keywords: cardiac interoception, cardiac interoceptive accuracy,
interoception, interoceptive accuracy, interoceptive awareness
1. Introduction
In recent years there has been an increased focus on the
measurement of cardiac interoceptive accuracy, the perception of
internal bodily signals arising from the heart (Brewer et al., 2021).
Such increased focus has been driven by concerns regarding the
validity of commonly used measures of cardiac interoceptive
accuracy (Desmedt et al., 2023). For example, the heartbeat
counting task (HCT; Dale and Anderson, 1978; Schandry, 1981),
one of the most commonly used measures of cardiac interoceptive
accuracy, suffers from the flaw that individuals who know their
heart rate can falsely appear able to perceive their heartbeats (e.g.,
Desmedt et al., 2018; Murphy et al., 2018). In addition, the
heartbeat detection task (HDT; first proposed by Whitehead et al.,
1977), also commonly used, has the flaw that it assumes that all
participants perceive their heartbeat at the same point in the
cardiac cycle—an assumption shown to be invalid (e.g., Yates et al.,
1985; Ring and Brener, 1992).
These concerns have given rise to the development of several new
measures. The Phase Adjustment Task (PAT; Plans et al., 2021) has
been described as one of the most promising of the new measures of
cardiac interoceptive accuracy (Desmedt et al., 2023). In this task,
tones are presented at a rate matching the participant’s heart rate,
but out of phase with heartbeats. Participants are asked to turn a
virtual dial to adjust the phase relationship between heartbeats and
tones until they believe the tones to be synchronous with their
heartbeat. As the starting phase is random across trials, the
consistency of the participant’s response is taken as a measure of
accuracy (as participants who are unable to feel their heartbeats
should choose phase relationships at random across trials). Bayesian
analyses were used to classify participants as interoceptive, non-
interoceptive or unclassified, reflecting the degree of certainty
surrounding evidence for cardiac perception at various thresholds.
The PAT was originally programmed to be administered via a
smartphone application (of course, it can also be implemented in a
lab setting), providing opportunities to increase the size and
diversity of samples in interoception research. Although the PAT
overcomes several limitations of existing measures (chiefly that
knowledge of heartrate is insufficient to provide above-chance
performance in the absence of the ability to detect heartbeats, and
no assumption is made about when in the cardiac cycle heartbeats
are perceived; for discussion see Plans et al., 2021; Desmedt et al.,
2023), the specific way it was implemented and analyzed could be
improved, motivating the development of the updated
implementation reported here (PAT 2.0). In brief (discussed in more
detail throughout), issues existed with the presentation of tones
relative to heartbeats, camera selection on multi-camera iPhones,
task instructions and the collection of confidence ratings, and (in
common with all other tasks to our knowledge) an analysis
procedure which was unable to identify interoceptive individuals
who perceived their heartbeat at a consistent phase of their cardiac
cycle (rather than a consistent delay from the preceding heartbeat).
The steps taken to address these issues are detailed in the following,
with recommendations for implementation aimed at further
optimizing the measurement of cardiac interoceptive accuracy.
Code for implementing the revised tasks described below, alongside
analysis scripts, can be found at https://osf.io/fp5sq/ and https://
github.com/Interolab/Interoception.
2. Methods
2.1. Refinements
2.1.1. Heartbeat detection
In the original version of the task, detected heartbeats were not
used to determine when tones occurred. Instead, the onset of tones
was governed by the predicted occurrence of heartbeats derived
from beat-to-beat intervals recorded every 3 s throughout the task.
However, given that the accuracy of this prediction could vary both
across participants and within participants on different testing
occasions due to differences in heart rate variability, it is more
desirable to use detected heartbeats to govern tone onset. The
original decision to base tones on predicted heartbeats was due to
the unfounded concern that participants may perceive their
heartbeat before it was recorded at the finger due to the delay
between the contraction of the heart and the arrival of the pulse at
the finger. As analysis of the PAT focuses on consistency, however,
it is not problematic for participants to perceive their heartbeat
before the pulse wave is recorded at the finger. Even when a
participant feels their heartbeat before it is detected at the finger,
they would still be able to demonstrate perfect consistency by
selecting the same phase relationship between tones and detected
heartbeats across trials. As such, in PAT 2.0, detection of the
heartbeat at the finger governs tone occurrence. This ensures that
any potential differences in the accuracy of the prediction of
heartbeats, within or across participants, cannot influence scores. As
part of this change, the range of the dial is now set by the greater of
either the running average period between heartbeats or last
recorded period between heartbeats (“instant period” in the analysis
script). This ensures that the dial always spans a physiologically
plausible interval and reduces distortions arising from anomalous
heartbeat period readings. The analysis script has been updated
accordingly such that the dial range period used in the analysis
script matches the new approach to setting the dial range in the
task. However, similarity calculations (described in section 2.1.6.3)
continue to use the last recorded heartbeat period, as these reflect
heartbeat dynamics when participants submit their delay selection.
2.1.2. Camera selection
An issue was identified with the implementation of the PAT task on
iPhone models that have multiple camera lenses—the iPhone
automatically switched the active camera lens, and this interfered
with data collection. We have now implemented edits to the code to
ensure that one camera lens is selected by the app and used
throughout the task, so that the task can be completed by
participants using any existing iPhone model running iOS 15 and
above (providing operability with 94% of iPhones in current use;
Sherif, 2024).
2.1.3. Changes to participant instructions and procedure
To increase clarity for participants, we implemented various
changes to the instructions and instruction procedure. Full details of
changes to the instructions