
Method
To address this issue, we present a comprehensive free-living
evaluation dataset, including 146.574 semi-automatic labeled
strides of 28 Parkinson’s Disease patients. This dataset was used to
evaluate the segmentation performance of a new Hidden Markov
Model (HMM) based stride segmentation approach compared to an
available dynamic time warping (DTW) based method.
Results
The proposed HMM achieved a mean F1-score of 92.1% and
outperformed the DTW approach significantly. Further analysis
revealed a dependency of segmentation performance to the number
of strides within respective walking bouts. Shorter bouts (<30
strides) resulted in worse performance, which could be related to
more heterogeneous gait and an increased diversity of different
stride types in short free-living walking bouts. In contrast, the HMM
reached F1-scores of more than 96.2% for longer bouts (>50
strides). Furthermore, we showed that an HMM, which was trained
on at-lab data only, could be transferred to a free-living context
with a negligible decrease in performance.
Conclusion
The generalizability of the proposed HMM is a promising feature, as
fully labeled free-living training data might not be available for
many applications. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
evaluation of stride segmentation performance on a large scale free-
living dataset. Our proposed HMM-based approach was able to
address the increased complexity of free-living gait data, and thus
will help to enable a robust assessment of stride parameters in
future free-living gait analysis applications.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at
10.1186/s12984-021-00883-7.
Keywords: HMM, IMU, Machine learning, Mobile gait analysis,
Stride borders, Wearable sensors
Background
In typical clinical gait analysis settings, a physician or clinical
expert observes a patient’s gait in a hospital hallway to assess, for
example, postural instability or motor function, which are major
symptoms of the neurodegenerative Parkinson’s Disease (PD) and
strongly related to independence, quality of life or risk of falls [1].
Therefore, new tools and technologies to quantitatively and
objectively assess various gait-related parameters are of increased
interest to understand pathophysiological mechanisms, investigate
treatment effects or quantify the disease state in PD [2]. Especially
wearable sensors and, in particular, inertial measurement units
(IMUs) are often used in clinical applications to measure spatio-
temporal gait parameters in order to objectively monitor disease
progression or fluctuations [3, 4].
Due to advancements in size, energy consumption, and usability of
wearable sensors, mobile gait analysis systems are getting started to
be used beyond the borders of laboratory assessments in home-
monitoring as well as free-living scenarios [5, 6]. Here, mobile gait
analysis solutions enable a continuous and detailed insight into a
patient’s mobility and motor performance under more natural and
realistic conditions compared to clinical snapshot assessments [5,
6].
However, independent of the recording environment, a robust
segmentation of individual strides from the continuous sensor data
is one of the first steps in most wearable gait analysis systems and a
crucial part of the underlying signal processing pipeline [7].
Various different approaches have been proposed in the literature to
solve the problem of stride segmentation for clinical gait analysis
applications [8–22]. Methods vary with sensor location, ranging
from the upper body like wrist, chest or lower back [9, 10] to the
lower body with sensors attached to ankles or feet [11–15, 17–22]
as well as with sensor modalities like IMUs or pressure sensors [7].
Peak detection [8, 9], wavelet-based approaches [10–13], template
matching [14, 15] as well as probabilistic machine learning models
like the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [16–20], and deep learning
approaches like convolutional neural networks [21, 22] have been
successfully applied in supervised laboratory conditions.
Although all of the aforementioned studies obtained good results,
they were constrained in most cases by a controlled and supervised
laboratory setting. Furthermore, most studies only provide a limited
amount of heterogeneity within the dataset due to the inclusion of
only healthy subjects, a rather small number of strides, or
evaluation on standardized gait tests.
In contrast, a continuous full day free-living recording contains a
variety of different unstructured activities as well as different stride
types like initiation, termination, turnings, or transitions between
activities. Influences of the external environment like context,
location, different undergrounds, or cognitive challenges are known
to be confounding factors for certain gait parameters [6, 23]. For
PD patients, day-to-day and intra-day fluctuations of motor
symptoms (related to health and medication state) increase the
heterogeneity and irregularity of strides even further [1].
Recent studies already highlighted the differences between
laboratory and free-living gait analysis [24–26], but a technical
evaluation of gait analysis pipelines on free-living data is still an
open challenge. A major issue is the lack of free-living evaluation
datasets, including ground truth information. For this reason,
evaluation studies usually focus on at-lab recordings where for
example pressurized mats [19] or motion capture systems [27] are
used as gold-standard references. However, such system cannot be
used for fully unconstrained free-living studies.
Martindale et al. [20] tried to address this issue by collecting data
of several semi-realistic scenarios covering different activities with
providing stride level annotations of a large cohort of 80 healthy
subjects. They used video recordings combined with pressure
insoles and a smart annotation approach to generate labels for all
activities. However, the study still followed a supervised protocol
with scripted scenarios and only healthy subjects.
Hickey et al. [28] also emphasized the lack of evaluation of gait
analysis algorithms on free-living data. To address this issue, they
equipped ten young and healthy subjects with a waist-mounted
accelerometer together with a body-mounted camera filming the
subject’s feet on two consecutive days for one hour each. Subjects
could then perform free-living activities in a completely
unsupervised setting, while the video streams were used to generate
reference labels. However, Hickey et al. only evaluated macro gait
parameters like walking bout duration and step counts, but did not
investigate actual stride border locations.
To address this lack of missing evaluation of stride segmentation
algorithms on free-living data, we present a fully unconstrained and
unsupervised free-living dataset including stride border annotations
of 146.574 single strides of a cohort of 28 PD patients. Due to
stigmatization and privacy concerns, we decided to not use body-
worn cameras or similar reference systems but opted for a semi-
automated manual labeling approach of the IMU data itself. For this
semi-automated labeling approach, an existing template matching
implementation based on subsequent Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW), presented by Barth et al. [14], was combined with extensive
manual post-processing.
Furthermore, a new HMM-based segmentation approach was
implemented for evaluation, as a probabilistic model is a promising
candidate to be robust and at the same time flexible enough to
handle the expected variety and heterogeneity within free-living
patient data. Haji Ghassemi et al. [29] compared different stride
segmentation approaches for PD patients and found that an HMM-
based segmentation could outperform template matching methods
like DTW or simple peak detection methods, reaching F1-Scores
above 95% in laboratory settings. Additionally, HMMs showed the
potential to handle also classification or sub-phase segmentation
tasks. Martindale et al. [30] and Mannini et al. [19] presented
HMMs, which can be applied beyond pure stride segmentation for
gait phase segmentation and gait event detection by modelling
swing and stance phase by individual models. Panahandeh et al.
[31] used a combination of multiple individual HMMs for activity
classification based on a cycle level identification. Furthermore,
HMMs were successfully applied for at-lab gait analysis in
hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) patients, where the
heterogeneity of the disease required the need of personalized
models and proofed their applicability in segmentation of severely
impaired and strongly heterogeneous gait [30].
Although the first steps towards the development and evaluation of
stride segmentation algorithms on free-living data have been taken,
this topic remains an open field in research with the need for
optimized and robust methods. In this paper, we make the
following contributions to the field of mobile gait analysis: first, we
present a comprehensive, free-living dataset of PD patients,
including semi-automatically labeled stride borders. Second, a new
custom HMM-based stride segmentation approach was developed.
The model architecture was chosen to best fit the available training
labels as well as to model the expected heterogeneity within free-
living gait data. Therefore, two HMMs, one for modelling strides
and one for modelling transitions from and to gait, were
individually trained and finally combined to a single flattened HMM
for segmentation. Configurable model parameters were thoroughly
optimized by a grid search to enable the best possible segmentation
performance for future applications. Additionally, to test the
generalizability of the data-driven HMM-method, model training
was performed first only on available laboratory data and second
also on the free-living dataset. To estimate the relative performance
of the proposed HMMs, their segmentation results were compared
to a non-data-d