
Methods
The algorithms described below can be run using the msConvert
tool as part of the freely distributed ProteoWizard package (binaries
and source code are available at
www.proteowizard.sourceforge.net). ProteoWizard supports
commonly used vendor raw files and many open formats (e.g.,
mzML, mzXML, mz5) and is executed as native C++ code in order
to maximize runtime performance. As such, this software package
provides an ideal programming environment for running efficient
cross-platform analyses. ProteoWizard also provides seamless access
to many vendor peak-picking libraries, enabling users to compare
results across different algorithms.
CantWaiT: A Wavelet Peak-Picker
The key signal processing algorithm that we incorporated into
ProteoWizard was a spectral peak-picker. In order to maximize
processing quality and cross-platform performance, we selected the
continuous wavelet transformation (CWT) method for peak
selection. The CWT method is noted for its performance in noisy,
low-resolution spectra while also performing well on smooth, high-
resolution data.9,20,21 For the parent wavelet, we chose the Ricker
(“Mexican Hat”) wavelet for its unimodal and symmetric properties,
providing a generic means of detecting peptides regardless of the
strength of their isotopic distributions.
CantWaiT is based on the MassSpecWavelet algorithm introduced
by Du et al.,9 but we have built upon their implementation to
reduce analysis runtime and to better handle spectra of varying
resolution. Previously, the method’s biggest disadvantage was slow
runtime, with the original developers reporting a processing time of
∼30 s for a single spectrum, which renders it impractical for use
with large clinical and research data sets. While this runtime was
reported in 2006 when processor speeds were slower than they are
today, the authors themselves acknowledged that code
enhancements for improving the algorithm’s efficiency were
needed. We reduced runtime by limiting the CWT computation to
10 carefully chosen wavelet scales. A challenge for choosing the
appropriate scales is the tendency for peaks and m/z spacing to
widen with increasing m/z; consequently, a good set of scales at low
m/z is seldom optimal at high m/z values. CantWaiT addresses this
problem by applying a novel, adaptive method in which the wavelet
scales that are sampled depend on m/z. Each spectrum is quickly
scanned to determine the appropriate scales to sample as a function
of m/z, by computing the average m/z spacing in a 10-point sliding
window for each m/z point. The wavelet transformation is then
performed using wavelet scales that vary linearly between one and
seven times the m/z spacing computed during preprocessing. CWT
computations are performed with wavelets centered on each m/z
point and midpoint in the spectrum. In addition to being
computationally efficient, CantWaiT also handles irregularly spaced
data or spectra with zero-intensity points removed. Thus, no
additional signal preprocessing such as smoothing or resampling is
needed prior to peak-picking.
Unlike MassSpecWavelet, CantWaiT does not perform ridge line
identification in wavelet space for locating peaks, which further
improves CantWaiT’s computational efficiency. Ridge line
identification is one of the more computationally intense steps of
MassSpecWavelet in which local maxima are connected along both
the m/z and wavelet scale axes. CantWaiT avoids this step by
simply scanning the correlation matrix a single time, locating local
maxima that are separated by at least 0.1 m/z. While this is a less
rigorous procedure for filtering true peaks from noise, we found
that it provided consistent results with the ridge line identification
procedure at a fraction of the computational cost. The local maxima
identified by CantWaiT are next filtered via SNR thresholding,
where the signal is defined as the maximum wavelet correlation
value in the ridge line. To calculate the noise, CantWaiT separates a
spectrum into bins composed of 300 m/z points each. The noise
level for each point in a bin is then set to the 95-percentage
quantile of correlation at the smallest scale within that bin. In the
final peak list, CantWaiT records the m/z and intensity values
corresponding to the maximum intensity value within each peak.
Pseudocode for CantWaiT is including in the Supporting
Information, Algorithm S1.
Turbocharger: A Precursor Charge Determination
Algorithm
In MS/MS experiments, mass analyzers catalog intense peaks in a
survey scan and then isolate these ions for fragmentation in tandem
MS. Ions are generally isolated for fragmentation within a small
window (e.g., ±1.25 m/z) centered at a target m/z value. Analyzing
the isotopic content of this region is the most conventional means of
determining a precursor ion charged state. This process is not
always straightforward. For example, multiple ions with
overlapping peaks may be present (i.e., chimeric spectra22), or
strong evidence for isotopic features may be lacking. A robust
algorithm must cope with these situations while remaining
applicable among many different instruments. Turbocharger
achieves this by using three criteria (m/z spacing, relative intensity
distribution, and total intensity rank) to score how well groups of
peaks conform to expected isotopic behavior. When the software is
first initiated, it performs simulations to determine how to convert
scores on the three criteria described below to p-values for
evaluating isotopic packets.
Turbocharger first uses CantWaiT to perform peak-picking within a
window surrounding the instrument-reported target isolation m/z.
