
Methods
Trail cameras (Bushnell Trophy Cam HD model 11874C, Bushnell
Core Low Glow model 119936C, Stealth Cam G45NG Pro) were
mounted at approximately 1 meter above ground to optimize
detection of mammals larger than 30 g. Camera sites were spaced at
least 1 km apart to minimize detecting the same individual
repeatedly. Cameras operated for a minimum of 30 consecutive
days per sampling period four times per year - January, April, July,
and October.
All photos were annotated independently by two volunteers, with
identification discrepancies resolved by an expert reviewer.
Filename, date, time, and location were recorded for each detection.
Detections from 16 sampling seasons (10/1/2020 - 8/31/2024)
were analyzed. Analyses were conducted in R (R Core Team, 2026).
Data management was performed using the readr (Wickham et al.,
2026) and dplyr (Wickham et al., 2026) packages. Timestamps in
the raw data were recorded in Universal Coordinated Time (UTC).
UTC timestamps were converted to local time using the lubridate
package (Grolemund & Wickham, 2011), transformed to radians,
and converted to solar time using the sunTime function in the
overlap package (Meredith et al., 2024). SunTime standardizes
observation times relative to sunrise and sunset based on
observation date and geographic coordinates. Temporal overlap
between bobcat and domestic cat activity was estimated as Δ̂ using
the overlap package. Overlap between species-specific activity
patterns was calculated separately for sites where each species
occurred alone versus sites where both species occurred. Watson’s
U2 test was used to compare diel activity between bobcats and
domestic cats at sites occupied by only one of the species and at
sites occupied by both species. Occupancy was defined as at least
one confirmed detection occurring at a site during the study period
(Oct 2020 – Aug 2024). Watson's U2 test was performed in
MATLAB 24.1.0.2537033 (2024b).
Camera locations were mapped and land cover within a 1 km radius
around each camera was visualized using Google Earth Pro on
Desktop (https://www.google.com/earth/about/versions/#earth-
pro). Land cover classes surrounding each site were characterized
according to the modified Anderson Level II classification system
(USGS, 2024). Area occupied by each land cover type was
quantified using the freehand polygon measurement tool in Google
Earth Pro on Desktop. Downtown Houston was defined as the
location of the 1910 Harris County Courthouse, 29.760890,
-95.359704. Map inset showing Texas within the United States was
created using Gemini Flash 3.5 and specifying datum WGS 84.
The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee reviewed this
study and determined that no protocol was required because
animals are not handled nor are they disturbed by the cameras.
Animal detection data, MatLab script and R script are available at
datadryad.org, DOI: 10.5061/dryad.s4mw6m9jg
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Courtney Hall, Memorial Park Conservancy; Ethan
Placke, Houston Parks Board; and University of Houston students
who contributed to field work, photo management, photo tagging,
and landcover analysis: field team leaders J. Berg, V. Urdaneta
Hernandez, M. Iacampo, C. Rodriguez, K. Kalenga, T. Snyder, A.
Uribe, G. Kostecki, D. Farfan, S. Sullivan; data managers J. Cabello,
J. Samuel, Q. Le, M. Castro, M. Velez, A. Mendoza, X. Johnson, K.
Zinsmeyer, and J. Enriquez; volunteers J. Vasquez, S. Dreyer, and
N. Parker, first year students in Honors Biology for Science Majors 1
(2020-2024), and Biology majors in Ecology and Evolution
Laboratory (2020 – 2025).
We are grateful to the parks and landowners who hosted cameras:
Houston Arboretum and Nature Center, Houston Parks and
Recreation Department, Pearland Parks Department, League City
Parks and Recreation, Challenger 7 Memorial Park, Glenwood
Cemetery, South Park Cemetery, Mount Olivet Catholic Cemetery,
Harris County Cemetery, Barrett Station Evergreen Cemetery,
Golfcrest Golf Course, Gus Wortham Golf Course, Memorial Park
Golf Course, Hermann Park Golf Course, UH Office of
Sustainability, and UH Coastal Center.
This manuscript was improved by insightful comments from M.H.
Hanke and an anonymous reviewer.
Funding Statement
This work was funded by the University of Houston Office of the
Provost Multicultural Student Success Initiative and Cougar
Initiative to Engage; the EJK Foundation, and University of Houston
Honors College. In-kind support for field work and photo
management was provided by Memorial Park Conservancy and
Houston Parks Board.
References
1. Census Reporter. 2025. https://censusreporter.org/
profiles/31000US26420-houston-pasadena-the-woodlands-tx-
metro-area/
2. Dunford Carolyn E., Loca Sophie, Marks Nikki J., Scantlebury
Michael. Seasonal habitat selection and ranging of domestic cats
