
Methods
We present a preliminary 3 patient case series drawing on surgical
and nonsurgical cases. The presented integrated algorithm for chin
assessment is applicable to medical aesthetics with the use of a
smartphone camera.
Results
Two nonsurgical patients each demonstrate retrognathia with
contrasting mandibular growth patterns; one clockwise and one
counter-clockwise. One surgical patient supports the presented
methodology, where severe clockwise rotation of the mandible
resulting from progressive condylar resorption was treated with 2-
stage surgery.
Conclusions
Effective lower face treatment requires integration of concepts from
across surgery, dentistry, and aesthetic medicine. Facial growth
patterns can be assessed clinically, enabling practitioners to plan
and execute treatments in a way that promotes facial profile
harmony and moderates an individual's aging trajectory. This
preliminary series highlights how the growth rotation pattern and
sagittal dimensions predictably impact lower facial features,
offering novel treatment strategies. This article is the first to
integrate concepts from Craniomaxillofacial surgery, Orthodontics,
and Aesthetic Medicine into a chin treatment algorithm that can be
easily implemented in medical aesthetics practice.
Level of Evidence: 5 (Therapeutic)
[image]
Research and historical study show that the importance of a
harmonious and defined lower face transcends cultures and eras.1
Nonsurgical treatments may camouflage dimensional deficiencies in
sagittal, transverse and vertical planes, as well addressing age-
related changes through volume restoration. When approaching this
area, the clinician must answer 2 key questions. The primary
question concerns suitability for isolated chin treatment, which
depends on assessment that includes an appraisal of the underlying
skeletal and dental relationships. Attempts to advance the chin in
isolation to mask a significant underlying sagittal mandibular
deficiency, especially where this corresponds with a sagittal dental
(incisal) discrepancy, will inevitably yield unsatisfactory results.2
If assessed as suitable for isolated chin treatment, the second
question concerns the modality of choice. Options for augmenting
the chin include surgical and nonsurgical, of which the most
popular are surgical genioplasty, alloplastic implant placement, or
injectable filler, which most commonly consists of hyaluronic acid
(HA).3,4 All 3 modalities have been shown to be effective in the
short to medium term, with better long-term results with surgical
genioplasty, and a less invasive treatment with injectable filler,
which requires reinjection sequentially to maintain results.4,3
Similar to surgical genioplasty, alloplastic implants are more
invasive, requiring a surgical procedure. With growing evidence of
implant-induced bone resorption at the mentum,5 coupled with a
move away from placement of alloplastic material in the face, this
is our least favored option. This modality is also commonly found to
be used in cases of inappropriate masking of a dentofacial
discrepancy, leading to unsatisfactory outcomes.
Providing facial profile harmony goes beyond purely augmenting
dimensions. Mandibular rotation around the fulcrum of the
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) and direction of osseous growth
determine growth vectors during development.6 This also underpins
our understanding of how certain craniomaxillofacial conditions
develop in surgical practice.6,7 Effective diagnosis and treatment of
complex craniofacial pathology requires interdisciplinary
collaboration. This collaborative approach forms the basis of the
present discussion, addressing a much-considered topic within
aesthetic medicine, while drawing on principles from beyond
medical aesthetics practice. To our knowledge, this article presents
the first nonsurgical treatment approach to the chin that unifies
evidence-based principles from across craniomaxillofacial surgery,
craniofacial development, and aesthetic medicine. The approach
presented is immediately applicable in everyday practice using a
smartphone camera in clinic.
Craniofacial skeletal development is arguably the single most
important factor in facial aesthetics and simultaneously one of the
least understood.8,9 If we consider nonsyndromic patients with
craniofacial anatomy that falls within the spectrum of populational
diversity, without significant age-related changes, and with a body
mass index (BMI) within normal range, the underlying etiology of
facial profile disharmony will likely be linked to maxillary and
mandibular development.
Facial profile harmony may be evaluated using a multitude of
methods,9,8 with the facial angle of convexity being one such
parameter commonly used.4,10 The facial angle is easy to measure
and relatively reproducible; however, it does not indicate the
etiology of profile disharmony and thus should be applied within a
broader context. Developing a deeper understanding of chin
aesthetics, it becomes clear that obtaining an accurate diagnosis for
profile disharmony goes beyond linear measurements in sagittal or
vertical planes. For example, the soft tissue pogonion may occupy
the same sagittal position in 2 patients with very different
diagnoses.1,11 Beyond linear measurements, chin form, centered
around the labiomental fold and the aesthetic S-shape of the chin, is
a key factor in profile analysis. This S-shape, or serpentine line, was
described in 1753 by Hogarth as the line of beauty, signifying
liveliness and activity, in contrast to straight or parallel lines.
In Craniomaxillofacial surgery, cephalometric analysis provides a
more detailed overview of the etiology underpinning skeletal
discrepancies that may manifest in dentofacial deformity.9,12 Using
a standardized lateral cephalometric radiograph, we may evaluate
sagittal and vertical relationships in the facial skeleton.12 These
measurements are used in conjunction with facial assessment to
treatment plan patients who present with dentofacial deformity,
and who have opted to undergo surgery, commonly in addition to
orthodontic treatment. It is clearly unfeasible and unethical to
routinely expose patients seeking nonsurgical aesthetic treatments
to ionizing radiation. There are nonetheless several clinical
assessment methods that permit a more precise understanding of
underlying craniofacial development without plain radiographs and
which inform how this development could relate to the presentation
of a patient in a medical aesthetics setting.4,15 (Figure 1)
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Standardized lateral views. (A) Female, 39 years old. Used for
illustrative purposes. Soft tissue cephalometric points: Pog—
Pogonion; Gn—Gnathion; Me—Menton; Go—Gonion; Po—Porion;
Or—Orbitale; N—Nasion; (B) Male, 20 years old. Illustration of a
high mandibular plane angle with clockwise rotation. (C) Male, 39
years old. Illustration of a low mandibular plane angle with
counter-clockwise rotation.
The steepness or flatness of the plane running from the gonion to
the menton in profile view, known as the Mandibular Plane (MP),
provides information on the high, normal, or low angle nature of
the patient's mandible.6,14 The reference for the mandibular plane
is a horizontal plane, also known as the True Horizontal (TH),
although some clinicians prefer the Frankfort Horizontal Plane.
Using these planes, we can classify a patient as high
(hyperdivergent, >32 degrees), normal, or low (hypodivergent,
<22 degrees) angle.12,13,15
During growth, endochondral ossification at the condyle occurs in a
superior direction, resulting in a downwards, forwards, and
counter-clockwise movement of the jaw and chin. This occurs in
coordination with vertical maxillary growth, leading to downward
and forward facial growth relative to the cranial base. If there is a
disruption to condylar growth (such as following illness or trauma),
or where growth is unbalanced through greater downward vertical
growth from the maxilla, condylar growth and chin point
advancement become desynchronized.13,6
The result is a compensatory pattern of ossification, creating a
posteriorly oriented vector, rather than a superiorly oriented one,
leading to a clockwise (posterior) growth pattern, typified by a high
angle, dolichocephalic phenotype, which tends to skeletal class 2.6
The actual sagittal growth of the mandible achieved will determine
the skeletal and dental relationship upon growth completion. The
growth direction resulting from the ossification pattern in the
condyle will also impact features such as the antegonial notch,
which is typically pronounced in the high angle, dolichocephalic,
clockwise-growing phenotype.13
This is in contrast to counter-clockwise growth, where condylar
growth is synchronous with, or exceeds, the downward growth of
the maxilla. If unbalanced in favor of condylar growth, this results
in a brachycephalic, or short face, and a chin point that rotates
counter-clockwise, advancing with condylar growth.14 The final
skeletal relation will depend on additional factors including the
sagittal growth of the corpus, ramus, and mentum.6,14,13
Natural head position (NHP) can be defined as a standardized and
reproducible orientation of the head in space when the subject is
focusing on a distant point at eye level.15 As a physiological
position distinct to each individual, it is widely accepted as the
most accurate position in which to assess facial proportions,
especially in patients with dentofacial discrepancies, who may
commonly posture their head and/or jaw as camouflage.1,15 In
contrast, the Frankfort Plane is an anatomical plane, chosen by
anthropologists for use on human skulls. This plane has been shown
to be divergent from the true horizontal plane across a spectrum of
clinical presentations1,15 and subject to high individual variation.
Despite ongoing common use of this plane among many facial
plastic surgeons, our experience combined with the published
literature supports