
Methods
Groups of 50 patients with asthma and 40 healthy subjects were
enrolled in this study. Clot retraction kinetics were assessed by
optical method (using a digital camera); fibrinolysis was recorded
by thromboelastometry; NET predictors in plasma or serum—
citrullinated histone H3 concentration, myeloperoxidase activity,
and cell-free DNA level—were measured by microplate
immunoenzymatic, colorimetric, and fluorometric assays,
respectively. Spirometry (FEV1 parameter), exhaled NO (FENO),
fibrinogen, d-dimers, IgE, and eosinophil, neutrophil, and platelet
counts were assessed by standard clinical procedures.
Results
We found the elevated NET predictors in the blood of patients with
asthma, which notably correlate with significant inhibition of clot
retraction and fibrinolysis compared to the control group. FENO
was found to be the most closely correlated with impaired
fibrinolysis and clot retraction among all clinical tests.
Conclusion
It was concluded that the formation of NET in the blood of patients
with asthma is associated with impairment of clot retraction and
fibrinolysis, which may contribute to the formation of unstable
thrombi. This may partially explain the elevated risk of venous
thromboembolism and pulmonary embolism in asthma.
Keywords: asthma, clot retraction, fibrinolysis, histone H3,
myeloperoxidase, neutrophil extracellular traps, neutrophilic
asthma, thromboembolism
Graphical Abstract
[image]
Open in a new tab
Highlights
•  Asthma is a condition associated with an elevated risk of
thromboembolism.
•  The formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NET) in the
blood of patients with asthma is notably enhanced compared
to healthy subjects, and it correlates with impaired clot
retraction and delayed fibrinolysis.
•  Attenuation of clot retraction and its lysis may contribute to
the formation of unstable thrombi and might partially explain
the elevated risk of thromboembolism in asthma.
•  Simple laboratory assays of NET predictors in plasma may be
useful in the evaluation of thromboembolic risk in patients
with asthma.
1. Introduction
Bronchial asthma is a condition associated with an elevated risk of
venous thromboembolism (VTE) and pulmonary embolism (PE),
which has been estimated to be from three- to sevenfold higher
compared to healthy subjects (1, 2). The fundamental event leading
to PE is the detachment of a thrombus from the vessel wall and
subsequent embolization of the pulmonary artery. The mechanism
of such detachment comprises mechanical instability of the
thrombus due to impaired clot retraction, a process in which
activated platelets generate contractile force to efficiently compact
the clot structure, making it more mechanically stable, i.e., more
resistant to the pressure of flowing blood. Experiments utilizing
animal models, in which the attenuation of clot retraction was
induced by pharmacological inhibition or by genetic modification of
platelets, revealed that efficient contraction of platelet plug or
platelet-fibrin thrombus is a primary factor determining their
stability under flow conditions (3–5). Correspondingly to PE,
thrombotic risk resulting from reduced platelet contractility has
been shown to be correlated with the severity and pathogenesis of
ischemic stroke (6) and systemic lupus erythematosus (7).
While platelets are the main constituent of arterial thrombi, recent
studies indicate that platelet-driven clot retraction is also essential
for the stability of venous thrombi, regulating their obstructiveness
and embologenicity (4, 7). The extent of contraction has been
shown to be the lowest in the tail of venous thrombi, which is the
most embologenic part of a venous thrombus (8). There is a close
relationship between clot retraction and fibrinolysis, a process of
enzymatic digestion of the clot. Clot retraction modulates the rate
of fibrinolysis by two mechanisms (1): it promotes internal
(physiological) fibrinolysis by elevating local concentrations of both
the fibrin-bound fibrinolytic enzymes and their substrate, i.e.,
contracted fibrin (9, 10), but (2) it also reduces external
(pharmacological) fibrinolysis by decreasing clot permeability and
the diffusivity of fibrinolytic agents within the clot structure (9, 11).
Morphological examinations revealed a high degree of consistency
between venous thrombi and pulmonary emboli (12), pointing out
that fibrin is the main component of both types of thrombi. Hence,
one may suppose that impaired (delayed) fibrinolysis is a factor
prolonging thrombus longevity, i.e., the duration of vein occlusion,
and elevating the risk of its disengagement by flowing blood. Such
an assumption is further supported by numerous observations
where altered fibrin structure, toward higher resistance to lysis,
correlated with an elevated risk of thrombosis (13–16).
In the blood of patients with asthma, the negative regulators of both
processes—clot retraction and fibrinolysis—are likely to occur.
These comprise compounds related to the inflammatory response,
such as reactive nitrogen and chlorine species, e.g., nitric oxide,
peroxynitrite, and hypochlorous acid (HOCl) (17–22). Recently, we
demonstrated that HOCl, at physiologically relevant concentrations,
may significantly inhibit clot retraction and reduce fibrinolysis in an
in vitro experimental model (23). The primary source of HOCl in
blood is the heme-containing enzyme myeloperoxidase (MPO),
which is released into plasma during neutrophil degranulation, a
process that is elevated in patients with asthma (24, 25). The
second source of MPO in blood is neutrophil extracellular traps
(NET), which are web-like structures composed of uncondensed
neutrophil chromatin incrusted with histones and other proteins
with antibacterial properties, including MPO (26). NET formation
has been found to correlate positively with lysis resistance of fibrin
clots in experimental models (27, 28).
It has been proposed that in asthma, alterations in small blood
vessels (triggered by proteases, bound with allergens, or secreted
from activated inflammatory cells) cause platelet activation and
further exposure of P-selectin and the release of interleukin-33
(IL-33), belonging to the alarmin class of signaling molecules (29).
These phenomena lead to IL-33-mediated infiltration of neutrophils
and formation of platelet–neutrophil complexes by direct
interaction of platelet-exposed P-selectin and its ligand—PSGL—
permanently present on the neutrophil surface. This, in turn, leads
to NET formation, enabling pathogen/allergen capture and rapid
neutralization (30). Since the lungs are very well perfused and a
relatively large organ, it is likely that the existence of a
hypercoagulable state may affect hemostasis in systemic circulation
through the release of platelet-derived regulators of clotting and
fibrinolysis processes, as well as factors initiating NET formation.
While the enhanced formation of NET in the blood of patients with
asthma has been reported by different research groups (31–34), the
relationship between NET formation and clot retraction and
fibrinolysis in bronchial asthma has not been specifically studied.
Consequently, this study was designed to examine the connection
between inflammation parameters, NET predictors, and parameters
describing clot retraction and fibrinolysis in the blood of patients
with asthma in comparison with healthy subjects.
2. Methods
2.1. Ethical considerations
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics of Research
Committee of the Medical University of Bialystok (agreement
number: APK.002.141.2020). Informed consent was obtained from
each patient.
2.2. Patient characteristics and inclusion criteria
Fifty asthmatic patients were enrolled in the study as follows: 37
subjects with stable, moderate, inhaled corticosteroid (ICS)-treated
allergic asthma (18 women, 19 men; mean age: 46 years; range: 22–
67 years) and 13 subjects with severe, unstable, ICS-treated allergic
asthma (10 women, three men; mean age: 39 years; range: 19–57
years). Asthma was diagnosed according to the criteria
recommended by GINA 2019 (35). Patients with asthma
exacerbation, defined below, were excluded from the study.
Patients with any other respiratory disease or any concomitant
malignant, heart, renal, liver, or collagen disease were also
excluded.
Asthma exacerbation was defined as an intensification of clinical
symptoms, a decrease in spirometric values, and an increase in the
consumption of rescue medications. These changes required
intensification of anti-inflammatory treatment (increase in inhaled
steroid dose and/or addition of oral corticosteroids) and, if a
respiratory tract infection was confirmed, therapy with antibiotics.
Infection was ruled out based on the patient’s history and clinical
examination, as well as WBC measurement. Patients who had had
respiratory tract infections in the month prior to the study were
excluded from the study.
Patients with stable, moderate (well-controlled) asthma had been
treated with low to medium doses of ICS (250–500 µg of fluticasone
propionate or equivalent) at a constant dose for at least 3 months.
Stable (well-controlled) asthma was defined as a minimal need for
rescue medications (short-acting β2-agonists), no exacerbations, and
no use of systemic steroids in the previous 12 months. Patients with
severe, unstable (poorly controlled) asthma had required one or
more hospitalizations for asthma and more than three oral steroid
bursts in the previous year. In this group of patients, blood samples
were collected at least a month after the last dose of oral steroids to
avoid the potential promotion of a hypercoagulable state. However,
because of quite frequent asthma exacerbations requiring systemic
steroids, the number of blood samples in this group was quite small
(n = 13), and it was one of the limitations of the study. Patients
with severe asthma had been taking high doses of ICS (> 500 µg of
fluticasone propionate or equivalent) and long-acting β2