
Experimental and
Computational Pipeline*
Christina Ranninger
Christina Ranninger
From the ‡Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry
and Bioanalytics, University of Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria,
Find articles by Christina Ranninger
‡,1, Marc Rurik
Marc Rurik
the §Applied Bioinformatics Group, Center for Bioinformatics,
Quantitative Biology Center and Department of Computer Science,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany,
Find articles by Marc Rurik
§,1, Alice Limonciel
Alice Limonciel
the ¶Division of Physiology, Department of Physiology and Medical
Physics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck 6020, Austria,
Find articles by Alice Limonciel
¶,1, Silke Ruzek
Silke Ruzek
From the ‡Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry
and Bioanalytics, University of Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria,
Find articles by Silke Ruzek
‡, Roland Reischl
Roland Reischl
From the ‡Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry
and Bioanalytics, University of Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria,
Find articles by Roland Reischl
‡, Anja Wilmes
Anja Wilmes
the ¶Division of Physiology, Department of Physiology and Medical
Physics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck 6020, Austria,
Find articles by Anja Wilmes
¶, Paul Jennings
Paul Jennings
the ¶Division of Physiology, Department of Physiology and Medical
Physics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck 6020, Austria,
Find articles by Paul Jennings
¶, Philip Hewitt
Philip Hewitt
‖Merck KGaA, Merck Serono, Nonclinical Safety, Darmstadt 64293,
Germany, and
Find articles by Philip Hewitt
‖, Wolfgang Dekant
Wolfgang Dekant
the **Department of Toxicology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg
97078, Germany
Find articles by Wolfgang Dekant
**, Oliver Kohlbacher
Oliver Kohlbacher
the §Applied Bioinformatics Group, Center for Bioinformatics,
Quantitative Biology Center and Department of Computer Science,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany,
Find articles by Oliver Kohlbacher
§, Christian G Huber
Christian G Huber
From the ‡Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry
and Bioanalytics, University of Salzburg, 5020 Salzburg, Austria,
Find articles by Christian G Huber
‡,2
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC4521035  PMID: 26055719
Background: Drug toxicity testing calls for in vitro assays as
alternatives to animal models.
Results: OpenMS and KNIME are applicable for processing of
HPLC-MS data sets to reveal metabolic changes upon
chloroacetaldehyde treatment of kidney cells.
Conclusion: Most significant changes are related to oxidative
stress.
Significance: Comprehensive multiomics studies support the risk
assessment at an early stage of drug development.
Keywords: bioinformatics, high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC), mass spectrometry (MS), metabolomics,
oxidative stress, KNIME, OpenMS, chloroacetaldehyde, toxicity
profiling
Abstract
Untargeted metabolomics has the potential to improve the
predictivity of in vitro toxicity models and therefore may aid the
replacement of expensive and laborious animal models. Here we
describe a long term repeat dose nephrotoxicity study conducted on
the human renal proximal tubular epithelial cell line, RPTEC/
TERT1, treated with 10 and 35 μmol·liter−1 of chloroacetaldehyde,
a metabolite of the anti-cancer drug ifosfamide. Our study outlines
the establishment of an automated and easy to use untargeted
metabolomics workflow for HPLC-high resolution mass
spectrometry data. Automated data analysis workflows based on
open source software (OpenMS, KNIME) enabled a comprehensive
and reproducible analysis of the complex and voluminous
metabolomics data produced by the profiling approach. Time- and
concentration-dependent responses were clearly evident in the
metabolomic profiles. To obtain a more comprehensive picture of
the mode of action, transcriptomics and proteomics data were also
integrated. For toxicity profiling of chloroacetaldehyde, 428 and
317 metabolite features were detectable in positive and negative
modes, respectively, after stringent removal of chemical noise and
unstable signals. Changes upon treatment were explored using
principal component analysis, and statistically significant
differences were identified using linear models for microarray
assays. The analysis revealed toxic effects only for the treatment
with 35 μmol·liter−1 for 3 and 14 days. The most regulated
metabolites were glutathione and metabolites related to the
oxidative stress response of the cells. These findings are
corroborated by proteomics and transcriptomics data, which show,
among other things, an activation of the Nrf2 and ATF4 pathways.
Introduction
Metabolites represent the final products of all cellular and
regulatory processes, providing a snap shot of the sum of all cellular
process occurring at that moment (1). Consequently, to study the
risks and/or consequences of exposure of humans to chemicals or
drugs, untargeted metabolome analysis offers a viable approach to
study the biological effects upon exposure to such compounds.
However, because ethical reasons preclude the study of biological
consequences of chemicals in human subjects (2), suitable models,
including cultured human cells, can be employed to derive
characteristic biomarkers and/or biochemical pathways that can be
used for extrapolation to humans.
Untargeted metabolomics aims at analyzing the broadest possible
range of metabolites present in a biological sample to obtain an
unbiased view of the organization and function of biological
systems and to characterize their responses to changes in their
environment such as drug or chemical treatment (3–6). Cultured
cells can be utilized as very discriminative sensors for external
stimulation and are very well suited for studying the action of drugs
and their toxicity in vitro (7, 8). In vitro cell culture systems have
numerous advantages over animal models, because they are easier
to control as well as to handle, and biochemical changes are easier
to interpret (8, 9).
Different analytical methods such as NMR spectroscopy or MS in
combination with separation by HPLC or GC are the key
technologies applied to metabolomics (7, 10, 11). An NMR-based
metabolic profiling method has previously been employed to screen
the acute effects of six chemicals in the human renal proximal
tubule epithelial cell line, RPTEC/TERT1 (12). The study showed
the usefulness of metabolomics (MTX)3 for discrimination of toxins.
A more complex experimental design was utilized for toxicity
profiling of long term cyclosporine A exposures (2, 13). Cells were
cultured on microporous filters and treated with two concentrations
of compounds for 14 days. At set intervals (1, 3, and 14 days),
transcriptomics (TCX), proteomics (PTX), and MTX were performed.
Cellular metabolome analysis was conducted via direct infusion
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry lacking the potential of
compound separation and identification via HPLC or GC, which
makes qualitative and quantitative analysis quite difficult.
A comprehensive quantitative metabolic profiling therefore requires
the combination of HPLC with high resolution mass spectrometry
(HRMS) (14). The high information content of data generated by
HRMS implies a strong need for automatable computational
processing of the otherwise unmanageable amount of data (15). In
addition to vendor software packages, numerous open source
software tools are available for data processing like XCMS (16),
MetAlign (17), MzMine (18), PeakML/mzMatch (19), and OpenMS/
TOPP (20–22).
Here we present a fully automated data analysis pipeline based on
OpenMS, a comprehensive open source software library for the
analysis of MS data, KNIME (23), an open source workflow engine
that enables visual and interactive data analysis, and R, a
programming platform for statistical analysis (24). Metabolite
identification is based on matching the accurate masses against the
theoretical mass of databases such as Human Metabolome Database
(HMDB) or METLIN, followed by confirmation of hits by
fragmentation using MS/MS and retention time matching using a
reference standard (26).
We performed a large scale profiling study of the long term
nephrotoxicity of chloroacetaldehyde. Chloroacetaldehyde is of
particular interest as a metabolite of ifosfamide, which is a
pharmaceutical used for the treatment of cancer (25). Finally,
proteomics and transcriptomics data were also integrated to
increase the depth of understanding of the metabolomic alterations
brought about by chloroacetaldehyde exposure.
Experimental Procedures
Chemicals and Materials
Acetonitrile for LC-MS was purchased from VWR (Radnor, PA).
Reagent grade formic acid, methanol, and chloroacetaldehyde were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. High purity water was produced
using a Milli-Q Integral 3 purification system from Merck Millipore.
Standard substances used for identification were obtained from
Merck (amino acids) or from Sigma-Aldrich (all other compounds).
Cell Culture
The human renal proximal tubule cell line RPTEC/TERT1 was
obtained from Evercyte GmbH (Vienna, Austria). The RPTEC/
TERT1 cells (26) were cultured on 1-μm PET 24-mm tissue culture
inserts for MTX and PTX, and on 0.2-μm aluminum oxide 25 mm
inserts for TCX and differentiated in a serum-free hormonally
defined medium for a minimum of 10 days before exposure
commencement (2). During this time, the cells cover the surface of
the filter, become contact-inhibited and quiescent, and develop a
stable barrier function of approximately 150 Ohm·cm2 (27).
Because no further proliferation takes place after differentiation,
each well has the same number of cells (28). The mature
monolayers were exposed to either a low (10 μmol·liter−1) or high
(35 μmol·liter−1) concentration of chloroacetaldehyde or control
medium, on both the apical and the basolateral sides. The cells
were treated every 24 h for 14 days and lysed on days 1, 3, and 14
in ice-cold methanol f