
Materials and methods
Soft-DTW-based averaging method for N400 event-
related potentials
The N400 is a non-strictly phase-locked event-related potential with
certain timing deviations in the time domain dimension, and the
application of the traditional arithmetic superposition averaging
method to it easily leads to the degradation of the signal-to-noise
ratio of the time series, which is manifested by the disappearance of
local features or the introduction of dense noise. In this study, a soft
DTW time-series differentiable loss function was introduced, and a
soft DTW-based superposition averaging method was designed
based on this method to perform gravitational superposition
averaging on the original N400 data and to extract event-related
potential averaging sequences with smoother waveform features
and more uniform start times from 35 electrode dimensions,
respectively. The method was named the single-subject short-
distance event-related potential superposition averaging method.
Dynamic time warping
The Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) algorithm is a numerical
distance measure for time series. The traditional Euclidean distance
algorithm relies on point-to-point numerical comparisons and
cannot match time series of different lengths. The DTW algorithm
allows one-to-many mapping between series points and combines
the idea of dynamic programming to achieve an efficient
comparison of time series similarity, and nowadays it has become
one of the most commonly used metrics to quantify the similarity
between series (Cuturi et al., 2007).
Assume that the multidimensional time series of variable length
take values in the range of Ω ∈ ℝp. Therefore, the time series can be
represented as matrices with p number of rows and different
number of columns. For two p-dimensional time series x =
(x1,…,xn) ∈ ℝp*n and y = (y1,…,ym) ∈ ℝp*m with lengths n and m,
respectively, define the cost matrix Δ(x,y):=[δ(xi,yj)]ij ∈ ℝn*m,
where δ is the differentiable cost function δ:ℝp×ℝp→ℝ+. The
Euclidean distance is chosen as δ in most cases. Let ri,j be the cost
sum of the cost matrix from the upper left corner to any point [i,j],
and the dynamic programming equation of the DTW algorithm can
be expressed as:
ri,jD⁢T⁢W=δi,j+min⁡{ri,j-1,ri-1,j,ri-1,j-1}.
The DTW algorithm effectively takes into account the translational
invariance of the time series in the time domain dimension and is
therefore often used in classifiers such as K-NN, SVM, etc. Petitjean
et al. (2011) first proposed to output the entire time series as a
fitted loss to achieve superposition averaging of the time series.
However, at the computational level, the DTW algorithm is not
trivial and unstable when applied to back-propagation loss
functions, a factor that hinders the application of the DTW
superposition averaging algorithm.
Soft-DTW loss function
To solve the problem of the non-minimizability of the DTW
algorithm, Cuturi and Blondel (2017) used Soft minimum instead of
DTW minimum and designed the minimizable Soft-DTW loss
function. Under the Soft-DTW method, the sum of costs A can be
expressed as:
ri,jS⁢o⁢f⁢t⁢D⁢T⁢W=δi,j+min{ri,j-1,ri-1,j,ri-1,j-1}γ.
min⁡a1γ,…,an={mini≤n⁡ai,γ=0,-γ⁢log⁢∑i=1ne-ai/γ,γ>0.
Where γ is the smoothing parameter. When γ = 0 the algorithm is
equivalent to the conventional DTW. Define the set An,m⊂{0,1}
n×m, where each element A is an alignment matrix for the sequence
x, y. For a particular alignment matrix A = [ai,j],A ∈ An,m, only the
point (i,j) on the path from (1,1) to (n,m) has its ai,j = 1, and all
other points have ai,j value 0. The path follows three directions of
extension downward, rightward, and diagonal right until it reaches
the lower right corner of the matrix. The cost sum under this path
matrix can be expressed as ⟨A,Δ(x,y)⟩. Thus, the soft-dtw loss
function is defined as:
d⁢t⁢wγ⁢(x,y)=min{⟨A,Δ(x,y)⟩,A∈An,m}γ=-γ⁢log⁡(∑A∈An,me-
⟨A⁢Δ⁢(x,y)/γ⟩).
Soft-DTW back propagation
The final goal of Soft-DTW is to obtain the numerical distance
between time series x and y. If y is regarded as the target series, all
that needs to be computed for back propagation is the gradient to
the time series x. The gradient is expressed through the chain rule
as:
∇x⁡d⁢t⁢wγ⁢(x,y)=(∂⁡Δ⁢(x,y)∂⁡x)T⁢(∂⁡d⁢t⁢wγ⁢(x,y)∂⁡Δ⁢(x,y))=(∂⁡Δ⁢(x,y)∂⁡x)T⁢(∂⁡rn,m∂⁡Δ⁢(x,y
Applying the same chain rule to the second term yields:
∂⁡rn,m∂⁡δi,j=∂⁡rn,m∂⁡ri,j⁢∂⁡ri,j∂⁡δi,j=∂⁡rn,m∂⁡ri,j⋅1=∂⁡rn,m∂⁡ri,j.
Define the elements ei,j=∂⁡rn,m∂⁡ri,j such that E = [ei,j],E ∈ ℝn×m is
a matrix consisting of ei,j. The above equation is then re-expressed
