
Methods
Given the plethora of web frameworks available, no one-size-fits-all
solution exists. Based on several empirical experiments with
different Python-based frameworks, we struck a balance and
selected one that is powerful enough to address common use cases
in MS-based research software development and, at the same time,
works well for a wide range of developers with diverse
backgrounds. Streamlit is an open-source framework popular in
bioinformatics web applications,7 which suits students with limited
exposure to Python and web programming as well as experienced
and more seasoned programmers. It comes with predefined user
interface elements such as multipage app support, a sidebar, and
input widgets. It is actively developed and integrates well with key
Python libraries such as Pandas8 and Plotly9 for interactive tables
and figures.
OpenMS WebApps is based on Streamlit 1.38 and offers an
opinionated template with a unified file and folder structure that
follows the key steps of typical workflows. Its architecture is shown
in Figure 1. Basic security features such as captcha control, a start
page with a quick start guide, global settings, data upload with
workspaces to organize project-specific files, configuration of
workflow parameters, parallel execution of tools or scripts,
continuous logging, and results visualization (see Figures 2 and4)
are made available as part of a web app template repository on
GitHub. Several pages, each corresponding to one of the key steps,
provide a clear structure for users. They are accompanied by
documentation for developers.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Overview: The app template is based on the Streamlit library.
Computation of mass spectrometry analysis workflows is done
either via Python libraries or via command line tools such as
OpenMS and other third-party tools. The app can be served via
containers in the cloud or on a local network. Apps can be run on a
local Windows PC via executables generated by a GitHub action
including all necessary dependencies in a stand-alone installer.
Figure 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Features. (A) Security: Captcha control prevents unwanted access to
the app. (B) File Handling: Files can be uploaded to the workspace
via an upload widget or by specifying a local directory path. Result
files can be downloaded as zip files. Furthermore, tables and figures
from the interactive result dashboards can be downloaded directly.
(C) Workspaces: Workspaces manage uploaded and analysis result
files. (D) Interactive Visualization: MS data visualizations can be
dynamically updated based on user selections.
Figure 4.
[image]
Open in a new tab
A comprehensive framework for building performant WebApps with
OpenMS TOPP tools, third party tools, and Python scripts with an
autogenerated user interface. (A) File Upload: Users can easily
upload and organize their input files stored in the workflow
directory. (B) Configure: Users can set, adjust, and save parameters
for their workflows using automatically generated input widgets for
TOPP tool-specific, Python script, and custom parameters. (C) Run:
Continuously updated log with three detail levels for full insights.
Users can exit the app and return to the workspace later while the
workflow is running or already finished. (D) Results: Interactive
result dashboard from which tables, figures, and result files can be
downloaded.
One requirement we aimed to fulfill was support for two
deployment modes: (1) as a web-based application running on a
server and (2) as a standalone application executable on a local PC.
Some of the features provided by the template have different
behaviors depending on online or local execution. For instance, a
captcha control widget is displayed only if users access the
application online. The file upload step allows the addition of files
to the project workspace. If the software is executed online, files are
uploaded and stored in the workspace folder. For local execution,
the files are copied to the workspace by default; however, to save
on disk space, system links can be used instead. Other parts, e.g.,
the configuration step that typically follows file upload, offer a user
interface to configure the workflow, tool, or script parameters using
visual components such as textboxes, checkboxes, drop-down lists,
and sliders. OpenMS tools are particularly well supported with
automatic parameter handling and input widget generation. Third-
party command line tools or Python scripts can conveniently be
integrated but require manual specification of their parameters. The
execution step allows users to run the configured workflow by
pressing a single button. During workflow execution, a stop button
is shown that allows aborting the workflow. A log output widget
displays diagnostic messages such as command line output. To
define the workflow in the first place, developers need to
implement only four methods of the Workflow class. These methods
directly translate to four pages, guiding the user through the
workflow. On the first page, the user uploads input files for the
workflow. The second page allows for the configuration of
workflow parameters, and the third page provides a convenient
interface to run the workflow. The final page is intended for
visualizing the results. Streamlit natively supports visualizations
using Python plotting packages like Matplotlib,10 Plotly,9 or
plotting packages specialized for MS data (e.g., spectrum_utils11,12
or pyopenms_viz13). In addition to these Python based
visualizations, custom visualization components can be developed
in web frameworks such as Vue.js and embedded within WebApps
(see the FLASHViewer WebApp14 as an example).
To ensure that all project-related files (input, configurations, results,
state of the workflow) persist, even if the user closes the browser
and revisits the web app later, we have expanded the Streamlit
session management. By default, Streamlit stores session data only
until a new session is assigned, which can lead to potential data
loss. OpenMS WebApps addresses this by storing project and session
data within project workspaces. When a workspace is created, the
initial Streamlit session ID is strictly tied to the project and
displayed to the user as a unique workspace ID. This ID is encoded
in the URL and allows users to bookmark and recover their data and
session state by using the URL. To conserve resources on web
servers, a script regularly deletes unused sessions by default. During
