
Methodology, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review
& editing
Find articles by Constantin Catargiu
1
Editors: Duo Lu1, Bharatesh Chakravarthi1, Zheng Chen1
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13211204  PMID: 42197842
Abstract
We study trajectory feature representations in the context of
detecting spatially anomalous vehicle trajectories in urban
intersections, using trajectory data from video streams captured by
camera monitoring systems. These trajectories are extracted using
an object detection pipeline and have particular characteristics like
short lengths, variable endpoints, and other viewpoint-dependent
detection artifacts, which make existing spatial feature approaches
less effective. We introduce two feature representations adapted for
intersection-level trajectories, based on distances to a fixed set of
landmark points, which provide fixed-length vectors compatible
with common tabular anomaly detector algorithms. We evaluate
using a dataset of 5378 labeled trajectories collected from camera
recordings in one deployment site, as well as on other existing city-
wide benchmark datasets, showing that, in the evaluated setting,
the proposed feature representations improve upon several existing
spatial features and enable better detection of both shape and
placement anomalies.
Keywords: anomaly detection, trajectory, features, landmarks
1. Introduction
Trajectory data are ubiquitous in today’s scientific literature, thanks
to the widespread proliferation of location-based tracking devices
and sensors. Whether they are about human mobility, vehicle traffic
patterns, animal behavior, or even movements of meteorological
phenomena like hurricanes, trajectories are a rich source of
information, leading to a vast body of literature on analysis,
classification, and other data-mining techniques tailored for them.
Analysis of traffic-based trajectories is a particularly important
aspect within the emerging concept of smart cities since traffic
management is an important part of daily urban life. While most of
the existing literature focuses on long, city-wide trajectories
recorded with GPS and other location-based sensors, the availability
of video-based traffic monitoring systems provides an alternative
source of relevant trajectory data, particularly suited for busy urban
hubs and intersections, which are likely to be already equipped
with such video monitoring systems. The use of AI-based object
detection can help with automatic extraction and analysis of
trajectories from traffic monitoring streams, providing a completely
remote and non-intrusive solution for trajectory analysis, without
needing to access the location data from the vehicles themselves.
Anomaly detection is an important aspect in trajectory analysis,
helping identify problematic and risky traffic patterns. In general,
traffic anomalies include spatial, temporal (speed-related), or more
complex behavioral aspects (e.g., aggressive driving). In this paper
we consider only spatial anomalies, i.e., trajectories with abnormal
shape or placement. We study spatial feature representations for a
specific type of trajectory, namely vehicle trajectories in urban
intersections extracted from traffic video using AI-based object
detection and tracking, in the context of anomaly detection tasks.
We investigate whether spatial trajectory features designed for
general city-wide trajectories are suitable for intersection-level
trajectories or whether these can be better handled with more
specific features. We introduce two novel spatial feature
representations for such trajectories, based on computing distances
to a fixed set of reference points (landmarks), and we evaluate them
using data collected from a busy intersection in Iași, Romania,
consisting of 5378 vehicle trajectories from a 3 h long video
extracted using the AI-based pipeline and hand-labeled for
anomalies in shape and placement. Our analysis shows that they
provide better results than several existing spatial feature
approaches, especially for intersection-level trajectories, in the
context of our preprocessing pipeline. We also discuss the
importance of preprocessing in the context of trajectory data
extracted from video streams with AI-based tools.
Our work follows the classical pattern of feature extraction followed
separately by outlier detection. This allows us to focus on
evaluating the features independently of the detection model.
Furthermore, the feature representation could also be updated to
match specific characteristics of intersections monitored.
The major contributions of this paper are the following:
•  We introduce two types of spatial trajectory features for
anomaly detection tasks, based on distances to a fixed set of
reference points.
•  We evaluate them in the context of a target urban
intersection, using a new labeled dataset with 5378
intersection-level vehicle trajectories, extracted from traffic
video with AI tools, followed by a specific preprocessing
pipeline.
•  We show that the proposed representations yield better
results than several existing spatial feature approaches for
trajectories in the evaluation site when coupled with our
preprocessing pipeline. We also discuss relevant factors such
as landmark placement and provide complementary results
on existing city-wide trajectory datasets, which suggest
feature versatility in different contexts.
We evaluate the proposed features with intersection trajectory data
collected from a single intersection site, where our traffic
monitoring pipeline is set up; in general, intersection-level
trajectory datasets are scarcely available. As such, the work should
be regarded as a feature-analysis case study targeting a localized
intersection setup, motivating a deeper look into spatial feature
representations adequate to intersection-level trajectories extracted
from video data, rather than a full-scale anomaly detection solution.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we
review the most relevant literature related to our work. In Section
2, we define the problem, discuss some limitations of existing
approaches, and introduce the proposed landmark-based methods
for trajectory features, as well as the new dataset of intersection-
level trajectories. Several anomaly detection results are presented in
Section 3, followed by a discussion in Section 4. Finally, we
conclude the paper in Section 5.
Related Work
There is a vast body of literature on trajectory analysis and,
specifically, anomaly detection. Several review papers [1,2]
summarize the prevailing approaches in the field, as well as open
challenges. We summarize below the major directions in the
literature, focusing on anomaly detection approaches, types of
trajectory data, and acquisition methods.
When it comes to the approach used for anomaly characterization
and detection, there are several major directions in the literature.
One traditional approach is to characterize trajectories using
features extracted from their shape or location and then use
standard vector-based outlier detection algorithms. For example,
Rintoul and Wilson [3] use 12 such features, mostly describing the
geometrical shape pattern, in order to implement data mining
techniques with the goal of retrieving trajectories with similar
patterns. Features used include length, various measures of
curvature, and descriptors of the convex hull encompassing the
trajectory. In [4], a histogram-like feature vector is proposed, which
describes the circular distribution of trajectory points around the
trajectory centroid. In [5,6], a trajectory is characterized simply by
computing the shortest distances from the trajectory to a set of
external reference points (landmarks), thus forming a feature vector
of distances; several types of distances are proposed and used. We
discuss both these algorithms in more detail in Section 2.
Note, however, that the selection of optimal features is highly
problem-specific and sensitive to changing conditions and different
types of trajectory data included. For example, an in-depth analysis
and comparison of geometric and kinematic descriptors in [7],
albeit done in the context of maritime ship classification from
trajectories, reveals that the predictive power of models depends
significantly on the ship classes included in the dataset, without a
clear and consistent set of optimal features. In [8], we find another
in-depth comparison of several shape-describing trajectory features,
evaluated in a clustering problem.
Instead of analyzing trajectories indirectly through features, another
classic approach relies on defining custom distance metrics,
specifically designed for trajectory data, which can quantify into a
single number the difference (or the similarity) between two
trajectories. Classic distance measures include the Hausdorff,
Frechet, and edit-based distances, together with a multitude of
variants, as well as more recent variants such as SSPD. A review of
commonly used measures is available in [9]. These distances can be
applied to sub-trajectories as well. A classic algorithm, TRAOD
[10], splits trajectories into sub-trajectories, approximates them
with segments, and relies on specific segment-based distance
measures to identify anomalous sub-trajectories. Despite being easy
to interpret, trajectory distances have some significant
disadvantages. First, they cannot be used with a vast majority of
vector-based algorithms, which require vector-space operations
(e.g., same dimensions, means, projections, Euclidean distances),
whereas trajectory distances provide only distance values between
pairs of trajectories, without a vector-space embedding. Second,
since trajectory distances need to be computed between every pair
of trajectories separately, they are not a good fit for continuous
operation when new trajectory data is continuously incoming over a
long time. As such, trajectory distances ten