
Material and methods
Forty medical students without prior surgical experience were
randomized to a control group or 45 min of simulator training
focused on exoscope control. Both groups then performed a
standardized microsurgical test task using a real 3D exoscope. The
task was a custom-made physical model requiring participants to
transit between concealed metal discs (diameter 0.5 cm) at different
depths and visual angles while passing a microneedle with 8-0
thread through them, designed to simultaneously assess exoscope
camera control and manual microsurgical performance. All
participants completed the task three times in a single session.
Results
The simulator group demonstrated superior exoscope control by
transitioning between the discs faster (median 4min 26s vs. 5min
17s, p = .009) and entering discs faster (median 4min 8s vs. 8min
1s, p = .0006) than the control group. Both groups improved across
trials. The standardized effect size was moderate (Cohen's
d = 0.56). Groups did not differ significantly in number of exoscope
movements or needle drop frequency.
Discussion and conclusion
Brief simulator training enhanced adaptation to exoscope controls
and manual task performance in novices. Further studies involving
neurosurgeons are needed to determine effect on users who possess
established microsurgical skills.
Keywords: Surgical simulation, Microsurgery, Neurosurgery,
Exoscope, Surgical training, Novices
Highlights
•
This is the first study to assess the efficiency of a virtual
exoscope simulator.
•
45 min of simulator training improves exoscope control in
novices.
•
Simulator group moved exoscope faster than controls
(p = .009) with equal quality.
•
Manual performance was superior in the simulator group
(p = .0006).
•
Both groups improved, suggesting rapid exoscope learning
curve.
1. Introduction
Digital 3D exoscopes are novel alternatives to microscopes in
intraoperative visualization (Langer et al., 2020; Montemurro et al.,
2022; Moisi et al., 2017; Muhammad et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2022). Exoscopes have been successfully applied in complex
neurosurgical procedures, resulting in similar outcomes as with
traditional operating microscopes (Auricchio et al., 2024; Calvanese
et al., 2024; Rossmann et al., 2023; Veldeman et al., 2023).
Although the surgical techniques used in exoscopic surgery are
identical to those used with a microscope, switching from
microscope oculars to a three-dimensional exoscope display and the
adaptation to exoscope controls, e.g. the footswitch that controls
the robotic arm, presents ergonomic and perceptual challenges and
requires training. Currently, no virtual simulators for exoscope
training are available. Exoscope training takes place mainly in the
operating room during live cases, which raises ethical concerns.
Poor early experiences may negatively affect surgical performance
and also result in reluctance to continue using the device. Cadaver
and animal laboratory courses are costly and logistically
demanding. There are currently no safe, unlimited practice options
allowing automated skill assessment for exoscopes. Previous studies
have demonstrated that videogaming experience in general
correlates with better adaptability to the surgical exoscope (Gupta
et al., 2021; Lynch et al., 2010; Yousfi et al., 2025a), suggesting
that a dedicated exoscope simulator could provide similar benefits.
We developed an exoscope simulator to train effective control of
surgical exoscopes. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether
short-term simulator training improves adaptation to a real 3D
exoscope compared with no simulator training, assessed using a
standardized microsurgical test task performed under an exoscope.
We hypothesize that: (1) simulator training leads to superior
adaptation to exoscope compared with no simulator training; (2)
overall manual skills are similar between groups; and (3) repetition
of test task will lead to learning effect unrelated to the initial
training.
2. Materials and methods
Forty medical students without prior surgical experience were
randomly assigned to receive: (a) 45 min of simulator training on
exoscope use (simulator group) or (b) no simulator training (control
group). The simulator was custom built to facilitate the adaptation
to exoscope controls. Following simulator training, both groups
performed a standardized microsurgical test task using a real
footswitch-controlled 3D exoscope. The task consisted of passing a
microneedle with 8-0 thread in a defined order through six metal
minidiscs mounted on an asymmetric surface of a custom-built 3D
printed model. All participants from both groups performed the
same microsurgical test task three times in a row during a single
test session.
2.1. Participants
We recruited 40 medical students (27 women, 13 men) in the
1st-3rd year of their studies. None had prior experience in
microsurgery or working with exoscopes. All participants reported
normal three-dimensional depth perception. Data collection took
place between June and August 2025. Written informed consent
was obtained from all participants. The study was conducted in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
2.2. Study design
Participants were assigned either to the simulator or control group
in a 1:1 ratio using a computer-generated randomization sequence
created in SAS prior to enrollment. Allocation was implemented
sequentially according to order of enrollment, resulting in
assignment to either simulator training before the test task (n = 20;
13 women, 7 men) or no simulator training (n = 20; 14 women, 6
men). Both groups were provided with a short instructional video
on exoscope use. The simulator group practiced at the Helsinki
University Hospital Microneurosurgery Laboratory with the
ExoscopeTwin simulator (version 1.0) for 45 min, after which they
started the test task.
The test task, performed with the 3D exoscope (Aesculap AEOS®,
BBraun), was preceded for both groups by a brief, on-location
tutorial on exoscope use, and 15 min of training. The tutorial was
conducted by one researcher, AY, who was not blinded to group
allocation due to involvement in the simulator training. The
researcher explained the exoscope controls and demonstrated the
location of all target discs followed by a brief lesson on
microsurgical needle-handling. During the training, the trainees
visualized the discs in correct order and passed a microneedle once
through a single disc, prior to starting the test task. All test tasks
were video recorded and stored in an external hard drive for
subsequent analysis. A schematic drawing of the study execution is
presented in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
CONSORT flow diagram showing the enrollment, allocation, follow-
up, and analysis of participants. All 40 enrolled participants
completed the study protocol and were included in the final
analysis.
2.2.1. Simulator training (simulator group)
In the experimental setup, the simulator group trained using a
custom-developed exoscope simulator (ExoscopeTwin, version 1.0),
designed and built by AY, ER, and EL in consultation with ML. The
main aim of the simulator is to teach the different controls and
functions needed in fluent use of the exoscopic camera. It is not
trying to teach microsurgical skills as such. The simulator consists
of three components: (1) custom software, (2) a custom replica of
an exoscope footswitch, and (3) a standard computer mouse (Video
1).
Supplementary video related to this article can be found at
doi:10.1016/j.bas.2026.106126
The following is the supplementary data related to this article:
Multimedia component 2
Representative recording of author AY demonstrating simulator use.
Download video file (6.9MB, mp4)
The participants viewed the simulation on a large 32″ screen
positioned directly in front of them, replicating the experience of
using a real exoscope. The simulator interface closely resembled the
visual output of an exoscope camera (Fig. 2a, Fig. 2b, Fig. 2c, Video
1). The simulator footswitch was used for planar translations,
rotational movement, and adjustment of focus and magnification in
a manner analogous to the real exoscope footswitch (Fig. 3).
Although the simulator allows user-specific programming of
footswitch settings, in this experimental setup the pedal layout was
standardized for all participants to replicate the commonly used
clinical setup.
Fig. 2a.
[image]
Open in a new tab
The simulator runs on a personal computer and is displayed on an
external monitor via HDMI. A virtual 3D training model is visible
on the screen. A standard computer mouse is used to manipulate a
virtual microinstrument, which trainees use to drag numbered
targets on the surface of the simulated 3D model.
Fig. 2b.
[image]
Open in a new tab
A virtual 3D training model created to practice exoscope
maneuvering skills, zoom, and manual focusing ability.
Fig. 2c.
[image]
Open in a new tab
A photogrammetry 3D brain scan model used for training in the
simulator environment.
Fig. 3.
[image]
Open in a new tab
3D-printed functional replica exoscope footswitch.
The training software contained multiple neurosurgical models,
ranging from the abstract to the realistic. The trainees progressed
from the abstract models to the more realistic ones during the
training session. The simulation was gamified to increase trainee
focus. The models were specifically designed to gradually teach
different skills: initial models focused separately on planar
movement, camera tilting, focus adjustment, or magnification
optimization, while the advanced models combined all of these
tasks into a single, integrated challenge. Visual cues had to be
followed by manual execution using a computer mouse.
2.2.2. Test task (both groups)
The test task was designed to assess active exoscope use, including
complex camera movement and image adjustments, as well as fine
micromotor skills. All participants performed the same standardized
test task three times during a single session,