
Methods
The assessment methodology prioritized functionality, usability,
and performance. The assessment consisted of three phases: (1)
tabletop evaluations, (2) simulated use testing, and (3) a sensor
suite rodeo simulation event. The second and third phases included
human participants leveraging the technology prototypes in
hyperrealistic tactical combat casualty care simulation
environments. Additionally, the third phase allowed the researchers
to assess the performance of each prototype in a range of
operational environmental lighting conditions.
Results
During the tabletop evaluation phase, all 3 prototype sensor suite
solutions demonstrated acceptable results (≥1) in the technical
specification assessment. The 2-part heuristic analysis revealed
variability, where the least complex configurations received the
highest assessment scores. To capture and record raw data, scores
ranged from 44.6 to 87 on a 100-point scale. To offload and export
the raw data, scores ranged from 22.9 to 87.5 on a 100-point scale.
During simulated user testing, all 3 sensor suites achieved passing
quantitative scores (≥60); the system usability scores (SUS) ranged
from 60 to 85 on a 100-point scale. More complex technology
configurations received higher usability scores. From a qualitative
perspective, vital sign monitor latency display issues led to
reliability concerns. All 3 prototypes successfully generated raw
data; the individual outputs ranged from 0.06 to 0.13 GB/minute.
During the sensor suite rodeo simulation event, all 3 sensor suites
achieved passing quantitative scores (≥60); the SUS ranged from
66.7 to 86.7 on a 100-point scale; the most complex technology
prototype configuration scored higher. Qualitative findings
identified data transfer issues with large file sizes and pairing issues
with vital sign monitors. All 3 prototypes successfully generated
raw data; the individual outputs varied (ranging from 0.012 to 0.24
GB/min) based on the environmental lighting conditions (full sun,
indoor lighting, and low light). However, from a data quality
perspective, only 1 camera component produced viable video data
in all 3 environments.
Conclusions
The comparative assessment revealed opportunities to combine the
strengths of both approaches in a next-generation implementation.
This preliminary assessment was constrained by several factors: (1)
effective tracking of consumable medical supplies, (2) advancement
of artificial intelligence algorithms to process the raw data, and (3)
ability to manage multiple casualties or patients. Follow-on
evaluations are needed to address these limitations. This systematic,
3-part methodology evaluates early-stage sensor suite prototypes
and provides a reproducible framework for advancing battlefield
medical technologies.
Introduction
The Military Health System faces a persistent challenge: while
medical documentation is mandated at all echelons [1], providers
in high-intensity combat situations must prioritize lifesaving
measures over record-keeping, often leading to significant data
gaps. Manual, paper-based documentation is not only burdensome
but also prone to result-interpretation errors due to varying
environmental factors.
To address this challenge, the United States Army Institute of
Surgical Research (USAISR), formerly known as the Telemedicine
and Advanced Technology Research Center, commenced an effort to
prototype systems specifically designed to passively document care
delivery within the tactical combat casualty care (TCCC)
environment. The sensor suite systems used individual commercial-
off-the-shelf components integrated with an edge computing device
and/or end user device as shown in Table 1. The 3 specific systems
were selected by the government after their respective proposed
approaches were determined to have merit.
Table 1. Sensor suite prototype configurations.
Medical Wearable
Audio Video Entry
Autonomous
Communication
Medical Ecosystem
Point of
Treatment
Aggregato
Audio or
video
component
•  PatrolEyes visible
or near infrared
camera
•  GoPro Hero 13
Black action
camera
•  MOHOC
M2 cam
•  Sennhei
Lapel
microph
Patient vital
sign
monitor
component
•  Vivalink
electrocardiogram
patch
•  Vivalink pulse
oximeter
•  Masimo
MightySat
pulse oximeter
—a
Provider
activity
tracking
component
•  Electromyography
armband
•  Movella DOTs
•  Movella
DOTs
Consumable
medical
supply use
tracking
component
—
•  Near field
communication
tags
—
Edge
computing
device
•  NVIDIA Jetson
Orin Nano
—
—
End user
device
•  Samsung Galaxy
S23 FE
smartphone
•  Samsung
Galaxy S21
smartphone
•  Dell
Latitude
7230
Rugged
Extreme
tablet
Open in a new tab
a
Not applicable.
Between September 2023 and July 2025, the USAISR conducted a
formal analysis of the 3 early-stage prototype sensor suites: the
Medical Wearable Audio Video Entry (M-WAVE), the Autonomous
Communication Medical Ecosystem (ACME), and the Point of
Treatment Aggregator (PoTAg). The results from this initial
comparative assessment highlighted opportunities to integrate the
unique strengths of each approach, paving the way for a next-
generation solution. By identifying complementary features and
capabilities among the various prototypes, the assessment
established a foundation for designing systems that are resilient and
adaptive to complex battlefield environments.
The systematic, 3-part methodology used to evaluate these early-
stage sensor suite prototypes provides a robust and reproducible
framework for guiding the future development of advanced medical
technologies for the battlefield. This approach not only ensures
objective comparison and evaluation of devices or systems but also
facilitates iterative improvement based on empirical data.
Ultimately, such a structured process accelerates the innovation
cycle, enhances decision-making for future investments, and
supports the creation of integrated solutions that can better address
the dynamic and unpredictable needs of battlefield medicine.
The premise behind this prototyping effort is that smart devices,
defined as context-aware electronic devices capable of autonomous
computation and data exchange [2], offer a unique solution to this
TCCC medical documentation capability gap. By integrating these
technologies into sensor suites, they serve as a force multiplier for
the TCCC level provider, which includes the following:
1. Reduced cognitive load: By automating the capture of patient
statuses and caregiver actions, the sensor suite system
alleviates the medic’s cognitive burden, allowing them to
remain fully “hands-on” with the patient without the
distraction of manual documentation [3,4].
2. Data integrity for handoffs: The sensor suite system facilitates
the accurate generation of a digital TCCC care, ensuring that
life-critical information (including medication dosages and
tourniquet times) is seamlessly transferred to the next echelon
of care without requiring the medic to pause treatment for
manual logging [5].
3. Mass casualty and patient management: Mature sensor suite
technologies will enable continuous, simultaneous, and
passive monitoring of multiple vital signs across multiple
patients through a centralized interface, significantly
enhancing a care provider’s situational awareness in complex
environments [6].
4. Enhanced operational readiness: Near real-time monitoring of
physiological parameters and environmental exposures (eg,
noise, radiation, chemical agents) ensures that the health and
safety of military members are maintained throughout the
mission [7-9].
In the long term, the resulting sensor suite datasets will empower
the development of artificial intelligence (AI) and clinical decision
support systems to further aid care delivery in austere
environments.
This comparative assessment evaluates the performance, usability,
and refinement needs of these initial prototypes based on four main
hypotheses:
1. Synchronized passive sensor modalities can establish large,
reliable TCCC encounter datasets.
2. Passively collected data can effectively train future patient
documentation algorithms.
3. Mature algorithms can reliably automate real-time data
inputs for digital TCCC cards.
4. Passive, autonomous collection will eliminate the need for
manual care provider input at the point of care (POC),
improving both efficiency and accuracy.
Methods
Overview
There were three phases to the assessment: (1) tabletop evaluations,
(2) simulated use testing, and (3) a sensor suite rodeo simulation
event as shown in Figure 1. The assessment methodology prioritized
3 factors: functionality, usability, and performance. For each
prototype, both the entirety of the sensor suite configuration and
the individual components were included in the assessment process.
Figure 1. Sensor suite assessment phases.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Study Design or Recruitment
All nonpersonally identifiable information data collected for this
assessment were conducted under an exempt research protocol
(protocol ID# M-11061). A more expansive, human subject research
protocol assessment methodology (protocol ID# M-11057) for the
sensor suite prototype assessments has been previously described in
the Journal of Medical Internet Research [10].
Analysis
The sensor suite analysis had 3 discrete phases (Figure 1). The first
phase was a benchtop assessment of each component of the
individual sensor suites, and the second and third phases required
the use of hyper-realistic TCCC simulation scenarios with human
subject participants engaging with the sensor suite technologies.
Phase 1: Tabletop Evaluations
The initial phase of the assessment process took place in a
controlled laboratory environment and was conducted by
independent evaluators systematically reviewing each component of
the 3 sensor suite configurations (Figure 2). There were two parts to
this tabletop evaluation: (1) a technical specification assessment
and (2) a 2-part heuristic analysis.
Figure 2. Tabletop evaluations.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Phase 1A: 