
Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software,
Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing –
review & editing
Find articles by Kilian Vogt
1, Gabriel Gutzmann
Gabriel Gutzmann
1Hanover Music Lab, Hanover University of Music, Drama and
Media, Hanover, Germany
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Methodology, Resources, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Gabriel Gutzmann
1, Reinhard Kopiez
Reinhard Kopiez
1Hanover Music Lab, Hanover University of Music, Drama and
Media, Hanover, Germany
Conceptualization, Methodology, Project administration, Resources,
Supervision, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Reinhard Kopiez
1,*
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13162214  PMID: 42131534
Abstract
This study replicates Tsay’s Sight-Over-Sound (SOS) effect in music
performance evaluation. The original study saw Tsay (2013) present
participants with triads of performances originating from music
competitions, including the eventual winner. In a three-alternative
forced choice (3-AFC) task, participants had to identify the winning
player. Participants performed better—to a level beyond that which
chance (1/3) could explain—when the triads were presented as
video-only, compared to audio-only or audiovisual presentations,
suggesting a visual dominance or Sight-Over-Sound effect. The
present study aimed to conceptually replicate this effect using
excerpts from the semi-final rounds of four international violin
competitions. The stimuli were controlled for musical content,
camera perspective, and camera movement, and each set included
the eventual winner. In an online experiment, 104 participants
completed the 3-AFC task for two competitions in the audiovisual
condition and for the remaining two competitions in both audio-
only and video-only conditions, respectively. Responses were
analyzed within a Signal Detection Theory framework. Participants
performed above chance in the video-only condition (M = 50.5%
correct, d′ = 0.572), but did not exceed chance in the audio-only
(M = 35.1% correct) or audiovisual (M = 38.0% correct)
conditions, respectively. Perceptual abilities measured by the
Goldsmiths Musical Sophistication Index, as well as violin or viola
expertise, predicted performance in the audio-only but not in the
video-based conditions. The latter is consistent with both Tsay’s
original study and previous replication attempts. Taken together,
the present results further support the existence of a Sight-Over-
Sound effect in music performance evaluation. The findings suggest
that as well as a focus on preparing the auditory domain carefully,
musicians should also take visual performance components into
consideration.
Keywords: audiovisual, audio-visual, evaluation, multi-modal,
music competition, visual dominance
1. Introduction
Music is often accompanied by processes of evaluation (Hasselhorn
and Wolf, 2018). Such evaluations can be implicit, such as
unconscious judgments about whether a piece, song or
interpretation is liked or disliked, or explicit, such as who gets a
position in an ensemble or wins a music competition. In formal
settings such as examinations or music competitions, judges
typically base their assessment on a set of musical parameters
(McPherson and Schubert, 2022). However, this perspective is
limited, given that “any music evaluation will be influenced by a
number of additional factors that impact on … validity and
reliability” (McPherson and Schubert, 2022, p. 104) as a general
rule. These factors can be categorized as musical, extra-musical,
non-musical, respectively, as well as measurement errors, though
some aspects could fall into multiple categories depending on
circumstances. Extra-musical factors include, among other things,
visual aspects of the performance (McPherson and Schubert, 2022;
Waddell and Williamon, 2022). Synthesizing 15 studies with a total
sample size of 1,298 participants, Platz and Kopiez (2012)
compared ratings of audiovisually presented music performances
with audio-only presentations. Their meta-analysis yielded a
medium effect size of Cohen’s d = 0.51, 95% CI [0.42, 0.59], for the
visual component. Moreover, Platz and Kopiez (2022) conceptualize
the live music concert as a “multisensory communicative setting
that addresses all senses” (p. 84). Sensory inputs and their
interactions are relevant when evaluating musical performances.
Evidence for this can be found in the phenomenon of cross-modal
effects or illusions (McPherson and Schubert, 2022; Platz and
Kopiez, 2022), for example in the “McGurk effect” (originally
observed for spoken syllables by McGurk and MacDonald, 1976) or
in its musical variant (Schutz and Lipscomb, 2007). The
communicative aspects of the live music concert setting include—
but are not limited to—persuasion (e.g., Aronson et al., 2018, chap.
7) and impression management (Goffman, 2022).
A more in-depth review of the literature on the role of sight in
listening reveals multiple interactions of senses, which also play a
role in performance evaluation. For example, in their seminal study,
Mershon et al. (1980) found that sound sources are often
mislocalized to the nearest plausible visual target. Short auditory
stimuli presented by a hidden loudspeaker were assigned to the
visible dummy loudspeaker in about 90% of all cases. Results are
interpreted as the “visual capture effect” which means that visual
cues can override those of auditory distance. Another example from
the speech perception domain is the ventriloquism effect, a
psychological phenomenon where visual cues dominate auditory
speech perception to make a sound appear as if it originates from a
seen source. Vroomen and de Gelder (2004) and Woods and
Recanzone (2004) examined this effect as an example of
multisensory integration and argue that these cross-modal
interactions are automatic and pre-attentive. They occur regardless
of whether a person is consciously focusing on the stimuli. Overall,
findings suggest that sensory modalities are not isolated but instead
share an interactive relationship that shapes our experience of the
world by merging auditory and visual information to create a
unified and ecologically efficient representation of our environment.
More recent research from the field of neuroscience (for an
overview, see Lee and Wallace, 2019) revealed that brain regions
once thought to be exclusively auditory are actually deeply affected
by other sensory inputs to create a unified perceptual experience.
This might provide a foundational understanding of how our senses
work in concert to navigate the everyday world.
Even in the construction of concert halls, successful auditorium
design must balance the auditory and visual domains to optimize
the spectator experience, as both modalities contribute to the
perceived intimacy and quality of a seat. As Jeon et al. (2008)
identified, while a clear, unobstructed stage view and visual
comfort are significant, the sound pressure level is the primary
predictor of audience preference. The study highlights a
multisensory interaction where high-quality acoustics can
sometimes compensate for poorer sightlines, although auditory cues
generally exert a much stronger influence on overall satisfaction
than static visual images. Kawase (2013) also investigated the
psychological motivations behind audience seat selection in concert
halls, comparing the preferences of music- and non-music majors.
Using a real-world seating map, the study revealed that
concertgoers prioritize visual factors, such as the visibility of the
performers, over auditory quality when choosing where to sit.
While both groups shared similar seating patterns—preferring
central spots for most ensembles and left-side views for piano
soloists—music majors demonstrated higher sensitivity to sound
quality and were more likely to identify specific trade-offs between
aural and visual data. Ultimately, seat selection is a flexible strategy
used by active listeners to enhance their personal experience of
musical communication based on the genre and size of the
performance.
Another line of research for a better understanding of the complex
multisensory nature of the interaction of senses in music
performance evaluation comes from the more recently developed
discipline of Sensory Studies (Howes, 2022). This approach “treats
the human sensorium as a dynamic whole that is best approached
from historical, anthropological, geographic, and sociological
perspectives … by directing attention to the sociality of sensation
and the cultural mediation of sense experience and expression”
(University of Toronto Press, 2026). Although primarily focused on
the interaction between musicians, Maslen (2022) explores how
professional musicians maintain multimodal perception to navigate
the high-pressure, real-time demands of live performance. Because
sound happens too quickly for players to rely solely on their ears for
adjustments, they must hear ahead of the music by integrating
auditory information with other physical cues, for example by
watching the seen gestures of colleagues to synchronize entries and
phrasing, internalizing a rhythmic pulse to feel the music’s
progression, and utilizing proprioception to anticipate the quality of
a note before it is even struck. As a result, the body’s internal sense
of movement and external visual signals work together to ensure
social and artistic cohesion. The successful coordination between
ensemble musicians was also the subject of an ethnographic study
by Pentimalli and Gobo (2023): Based on observations from a
musical trio rehearsed with their hearing suppressed, the authors
demonstrate that performers rely heavily on a phenomenon they
call “visual hearing” which means the existence of hybrid senses
that go beyond simple collaboration. This merged sensory
experience allows musicians to “see” sound by monitoring pertinent
visual cues, such a