
Materials and methods
OpenMS
OpenMS is a comprehensive C++ framework for computational
mass spectrometry. A wide range of MS-related data structures and
algorithms allow rapid prototyping of data processing pipelines for
mass spectrometry-based proteomics. OpenMS is freely available at
www.openms.de. All experiments outlined here can be performed
using the OpenMS library.
Data generation
All data used in the example processing pipeline have been
acquired with the same instrumental setup. A mouse proteome
dataset was used as training data and the UPS1 protein mixture,
containing 48 different proteins (Sigma Aldrich, Catalog Number
U6133) was used as test data. All protein mixtures were digested
with trypsin (Promega) and the resulting peptide mixtures were
analyzed using a nanoflow LC (Proxeon Biosystems) with nano-
HPLC column (75 mm by 15 cm) packed in-house with 3-mm C18
beads (Dr. Maisch). The LC was online coupled to a 4000 QTrap
(ABSciex). The mass to charge range for precursor selection for Q1
was set to 400-1000 Th (Thomson) and for production selection for
Q3 to 400-1,200 Th.
Training data
Peptide identifications for the mouse dataset were performed using
consensus identifications [19] on the basis of the Mascot [20], X!
Tandem [21] and OMSSA [22] search engines. The SwissProt [23]
mouse database (version 57.1) was used for all database search
programs. All searches were performed using a combined target/
decoy database. The decoy sequences were generated by reversing
all protein sequences. False discovery rates were estimated using q-
values [24] and a q-value cut-off of 0.01 was used to extract correct
identifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a
fixed modification and no variable modifications were allowed. The
precursor mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da and the production
tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. For the different prediction models the
datasets were created as follows:
If the same sequence and charge was identified several times, the
spectrum with the highest total ion current (TIC) was kept. The best
1,000 peptides (ranked according to their q-values) were used for
training of the retention time and the proteotypicity. No missed
cleavages were allowed for the training. The proteotypicity model
needs additional negative examples; peptides that have theoretical
m/z values within the instrument detection range, but are not
observed in the training dataset. One thousand undetected peptides
from proteins with high sequence coverage (many identified
peptides) were used for this purpose.
Experimental test data
The transitions were calculated and optimally scheduled for the 48
proteins included in the UPS1 mix. The experimental processing
was done as for the training data.
Pre-existing, experimentally validated transition information
Besides the pure computational determination of the optimal
transition schedule, our approach also allows additional
incorporation of information from existing repositories. In this
article, we illustrate the information retrieval for the SRMAtlas
(http://www.srmatlas.org) repository. The data retrieval is from
public repositories is exemplified with the α-lactalbumin protein
(UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot: P00709 (LALBA_HUMAN)).
Algorithmic procedures
The aim of targeted proteomics experiments is the identification
and quantification of a given set of proteins. The size of this set can
range from single proteins, such as biomarkers, over moderate sized
sets, such as all components of a cellular pathway, up to the entire
proteomes. Depending on this target protein set the formulation of
the problem needs information on the proteotypicity and the
retention time of all theoretical peptides that can result from the
protein sequences, as well as on the production intensity for a given
peptide sequence.
These unknowns can either be filled by experimental evidence, by
de novo calculation of prediction models (see Figure 1) or by a
combination of both. In the following we will summarize the
methods underlying the single prediction methods and finally we
will show the formulation of an integer linear program that allows
combining different methods to optimally schedule transitions in an
SRM assay. The final combination needs to cope with the
uncertainty from the prediction methods, while optimizing the
coverage of the proteins that are analyzed within one experiment.
Integer linear program (ILP)
An ILP is a technique for the optimization of a linear objective
function. For the SRM experimental design, this optimization
problem is to find the maximal number of transitions that can be
placed into one experiment, while preserving several constraints,
such as the number of simultaneous transitions.
Retention time prediction
For the prediction of retention times for peptide sequences a model
is calculated based on support vector regression (SVR [25]). The
relevant sequence information is integrated in this model using a
specialized string paired oligo border kernel (POBK). A detailed
algorithmic description of this method can be found in [16]. The
training of the retention time model needs data that were acquired
on the same instrument as the experiment. The method shown here
requires only about 40 peptides with accurately annotated retention
times. The support vector regression method aims to find a function
f : X → Y, Y ⊆ ℝ from n labeled training samples (xi, yi) ∈ {(xi, yi) |
xi ∈ X, yi ∈ Y, i = 1, .., n} in order to allow predictions y ∈ Y to
unknown data samples x ∈ X from the same data source.
Proteotypicitiy prediction
Proteotypic peptides are unique and detectable peptides. While
uniqueness within a given database is trivial to determine,
