
Methods
Study sites.
This research was undertaken across 3 study sites, each comprising
a unique Australian bioregion (Fig. 1): the Simpson Desert of
central Australia (arid bioregion); the snowy mountains region of
Kosciuszko National Park in southern Australia (alpine bioregion);
and Wolgan Valley within the Blue Mountains of eastern Australia
(temperate bioregion; Fig. 1).
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Experimental setup to monitor vertebrate scavengers, including the
focal species of this study, the Red Fox, and secondarily the Dingo.
A) shows the study sites in 3 bioregions, B) shows the carcass site
set-up adopted, with the remote monitoring camera positioned ∼4 m
from the staked kangaroo carcass, and C to E) shows an example of
kangaroo carcass distribution in a single season of monitoring
(yellow dots) within each study site (bioregion).
The arid bioregion is characterized as a hot desert (average
maximum temperatures range from 23°C in June to 40 °C in
January, nearest station 100 km away at Bedourie, records from
1988 - 2020; Bureau of Meteorology 2024) with long parallel sand
dune crests supporting more sheltered inter-dune valleys. These 2
habitat types are unique, with the inter-dune valleys featuring
sparse woodlands consisting of Georgina Gidgee (Acacia georgianae;
closed habitat) whereas the exposed dune crests support hummock
grasslands of spinifex (Triodia spp.; open habitat). Elevations within
the arid bioregion range from 65 to 120 m above sea-level (a.s.l).
The alpine bioregion is located within the Australian Alps and is the
only Australian environment to receive regular snowfall, with
average maximum temperatures ranging from 3 °C in July to 20 °C
in January (nearest station 20 km away at Perisher Valley, records
from 2010 - 2020; Bureau of Meteorology 2024) and elevation from
1,305 to 1,540 m a.s.l. Vegetation communities within this
bioregion are either grasslands dominated by native snow grass
(Poa spp.; open habitat) or montane, sub-alpine and alpine forests
and woodlands, with dominant canopy cover provided by Snow
Gum (Eucalyptus pauciflora; closed habitat). Finally, the temperate
bioregion is located within eastern Australia between elevations of
540 to 680 m a.s.l. and experiences average maximum temperatures
ranging from 11°C in July to 27 °C in January (nearest station 30
km away at Lithgow, records from 1878 - 2020; Bureau of
Meteorology 2024). Vegetation communities consist of derived
grasslands supporting a matrix of both native and exotic grass
species (open habitat) and open forest/woodlands that feature a
heterogeneous mix of Eucalyptus tree species (closed habitat). For
more detailed descriptions of the study sites, refer to Spencer and
Newsome (2021).
Monitoring red foxes on carcasses.
To monitor Red Fox scavenging activity, we deployed 40 macropod
carcasses across each of the study sites (n = 120 total over the 3
bioregions; Spencer and Newsome 2021). Twenty carcasses were
deployed in each bioregion during the warm season (October to
February) and 20 during the cool season (March to August). Within
each season, for each bioregion, carcass sites were evenly
distributed between “open” and “closed” habitats, respectively (n = 
10 for each habitat type for each season). Closed habitats were
chosen such that they were at least 50 m from the nearest open area
and had at least 20% canopy cover. Monitoring occurred during
August 2017 (cool season) and February 2018 (warm season)
within the temperate bioregion, during March 2018 (cool season)
and January 2019 (warm season) within the alpine bioregion, and
June 2018 (cool season) and November 2018 (warm season) within
the arid bioregion. Carcasses were spaced 1 km from the nearest
carcass to mitigate the potential for mixed carcass cues influencing
detection and scavenging rates. Sites were also moved >200 m
between each deployment period (season) in respective bioregions
to achieve spatial independence, especially with respect to any
remaining olfactory cues from previous carcasses monitored
(Finnerty et al. 2022). One carcass site was omitted from the alpine
bioregion during the summer deployment due to camera theft.
Carrion of adult eastern grey kangaroos (Macropus giganteus) were
used within the alpine and temperate bioregions, whereas adult red
kangaroos (Osphranter rufus) were used within the arid bioregion.
All carcasses were sourced from legally approved population
management culls according to scientific license permits (SL
101901 and SPP WA0006737), with research approved by the
University of Sydney Animal Ethics Committee (Project number:
2017/1173).
To capture the activity of scavengers at carcass sites, including red
foxes, we placed a Reconyx HyperFire PC800 camera trap (Reconyx
Inc., Holmen, Wisconsin, United States) on a star picket 3 to 4 m
from each kangaroo carcass (Fig. 1). Cameras were programmed to
take 10 images continuously, without delay, when triggered by a
heat signature and movement. To mitigate the likelihood of the
carcass being removed from the frame of cameras, we tied each
carcass with wire to 30 cm star pickets hammered into the ground
approximately 60 cm apart. Carcasses were fastened with wire
around the neck and through the Achilles tendon, as in other
