
Materials and methods
Study site and subjects
We studied wild, non-habituated, non-provisioned chimpanzees at
the Dindefelo Community Nature Reserve (hereafter Dindefelo), in
the Kedougou region, southeastern Senegal (Fig. 1b). Dindefelo
occupies 140 km2 alongside the border with Guinea, 40 km
southeast of the Niokolo-Koba National Park (Senegal). Dindefelo
encompasses multiple vegetation types: grassland, shrubland,
wooded grassland, woodland, gallery forest, forest, dense bamboo
(Oxytenanthera abyssinica) woodland, and cropland. There is an
extensive dry season (November–May) and a rainy season (June-
October). Mean annual temperature is 28.5ºC and mean annual
precipitation is 1129 mm. We have identified 53 adult chimpanzees
in Dindefelo. The reserve and its surrounding area have a total of
14 villages and hamlets. For further description of the study site see
Dotras et al. (2024) and Sánchez-Megías et al. (2024).
Data collection
During the baobab fruiting season from November 2021 to January
2022, we deployed camera traps (Bresser DL-30MP, Browning BTC-
T-4 K Edge, and Bushnell Trophy Cam HD Essential E3) on five
locations, and we recorded baobab pounding in three of them
(Fig. 1b). We selected these locations based on previous behavioral,
archeological and acoustic evidence of baobab pounding, and fruit
abundance. We placed camera traps to record both baobab trunks
and potential anvils around them. Camera traps recorded upon
detecting movement for 1 min of footage with a 1-s delay between
consecutive videos. During this study, we found and studied two
more baobab-pounding sites where no cameras were placed. In
addition, during the baobab fruiting season of 2019-2020, we
opportunistically recorded from afar three videos of baobab
pounding with a hand-held camera (Sony DSC-H400; Fig. 1b).
Data analysis
We analyzed the videos in which chimpanzees performed baobab
pounding. We defined a baobab-pounding event as the consecutive
footage of the same individual using the same anvil to open the
same baobab fruit, without leaving the camera frame or stopping
the pounding for more than 15 min (following Boesch et al. 2017).
We obtained the GPS location of each baobab-pounding site using a
Garmin Etrex 32x. For each event, we noted the date, time,
duration (s), hand used to pound the fruit, body position, anvil
material, number of hits against the anvil, whether the individual
managed to open the fruit, and fruit-grasping technique (Fig. 2a, b;
Table 1). We recorded individual sex and age (Table 1). We did not
identify the sex of infants.
Fig. 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
a Male adult chimpanzee pounding a baobab fruit against a boulder
while holding it by the stem, b male adult chimpanzee pounding a
baobab fruit against a boulder while holding it by the pericarp, c
female adult chimpanzee trying to open a baobab fruit by biting it,
d infant chimpanzee pounding a baobab fruit against a rocky
outcrop, e baobab fruit remnants smeared against the surface of a
boulder, f baobab fruit remnants smeared against the surface of a
baobab tree root, g baobab fruit remnants smeared against the
surface of a boulder and cracked, empty baobab fruit shells found
