
Methodology, Project administration, Software, Validation,
Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Giacomo Sasso
1,2,*, Alessandro Pagani
Alessandro Pagani
2Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology,
Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing
- review & editing
Find articles by Alessandro Pagani
2, Aaron M Duncan
Aaron M Duncan
1School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK.
Data curation, Software
Find articles by Aaron M Duncan
1, Gianni Pedrizzetti
Gianni Pedrizzetti
3Department of Engineering and Architecture, University of Trieste,
Trieste, Italy.
Software, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Gianni Pedrizzetti
3, Nicola Pugno
Nicola Pugno
1School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK.
4Mechano-X Labs, Department of Civil, Environmental and
Mechanical Engineering, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Nicola Pugno
1,4, James J C Busfield
James J C Busfield
1School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK.
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition,
Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision,
Writing - review & editing
Find articles by James J C Busfield
1,*, Federico Carpi
Federico Carpi
2Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy.
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition,
Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Visualization, Writing -
original draft, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Federico Carpi
2,*
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13330820  PMID: 42397916
Abstract
High-resolution, real-time tactile sensing is essential for robotic
tasks that demand accurate, dynamic detection of contact
morphology and pressure distribution, such as grasping and
manipulation of delicate, slippery, or irregularly shaped objects.
Existing technologies, however, face a fundamental trade-off
between spatial resolution and response speed. Taxel-based sensors
(e.g., capacitive, resistive, or piezoelectric) operate in real time but
are intrinsically limited in resolution by taxel size, spacing, wiring,
and cross-talk; even deep learning–based tactile super-resolutions
rarely surpass ∼1 millimeter. Finer resolutions can be achieved with
vision-based tactile sensors using just a camera, although the
computation required to transform raw images into three-
dimensional contact maps inherently introduces latency. Here, we
present mechanochromic tactile sensors that directly encode
mechanical strain into spatially resolved structural colors, enabling
vision-based tactile sensing with an unprecedented combination of
high resolution, real-time operation, and intrinsic simplicity. The
devices consist of a stretchable mechanochromic Bragg reflector
embedded between two soft silicone layers, whose thickness can be
tailored to precisely map contact pressure or strain. As an example,
we present topological maps of a fingertip, a one-penny coin, and a
leaf, with ∼100 micrometer resolution. In comparison to the most
performing vision-based tactile sensors, this was achieved without
requiring any deep learning–based data enhancement and without
introducing any computational latency. The straightforward
applicability of this mechanochromic strategy to enhance vision-
based tactile sensing in a simple yet powerful way underscores its
transformative potential for uses as diverse as robotic gripping and
handling, tactile product inspection, and enhanced human-robot
interaction.
Mechanochromic sensors allow for vision-based tactile sensing in
real time at high spatial resolutions.
INTRODUCTION
Tactile sensing plays an ever-growing role in various robotic
systems interacting with the physical world, such as
anthropomorphic hands and grippers. Such machines require soft/
flexible surfaces capable of spatially distributed tactile sensing and
conformability to objects of variable geometrical complexity (1–3).
In particular, the ability to build spatial maps of contact
morphology and pressure at high resolution and in real time is
fundamental for high-level robotic functions as diverse as object
detection, grasping and manipulation, environmental tactile
mapping, and enhanced human-machine interaction (4–7).
Existing tactile sensing strategies typically rely on piezocapacitive
(8–10), piezoresistive (11–13), piezoelectric (14, 15), triboelectric
(16, 17), or magnetic effects (18, 19). These technologies transduce
mechanical deformations into electrical information through arrays
of sensing units (taxels). Usually, they do not require time-
consuming processing, enabling real-time operation. However,
when such arrays are embedded into soft/flexible tactile interfaces,
their spatial resolution is limited by the taxel size, spacing, and
cross-talk, along with the surface area required to route stretchable/
flexible interconnects to peripheral electronics (20). Recently,
combinations of taxel arrays with deep learning–based strategies
have been used to achieve tactile super-resolutions (i.e., spatial
resolutions finer than the taxel-constrained physical limit), although
they remain confined to the order of 1 mm (1).
To overcome the limitations of taxel-based technologies, various
approaches have been proposed. Xu et al. (21), for example,
replaced conventional arrays of small elastomeric capacitors with a
layered structure, comprising two capacitive membranes, virtually
segmented into multiple sensing zones through a multifrequency
interrogation method. That strategy enabled spatially resolved
sensing without the need for physically segmented taxels (21).
However, achieving high-resolution mapping for fine tactile sensing
with such a method remains challenging. Alternatively, electrical
impedance tomography (EIT) techniques can be used for contact
localization from electrical measurements taken exclusively from
the periphery of conductive surfaces (22–24). While promising in
terms of wiring simplification, current EIT-based systems remain
limited to spatial resolutions on the order of 10 mm (23).
An effective alternative is offered by vision-based (or optical) tactile
sensing (25, 26). It replaces an array of taxels with just a camera,
which captures contact-induced deformations of a soft elastomeric
interface. The camera is usually positioned to monitor the tactile
interface from the side opposite to where contact occurs, i.e., from
the inside of an enclosure created behind it. Tactile events are
typically detected using two main strategies: (i) tracking the
displacement of embedded visual markers (25, 27–30), such as in
TacTip sensors (31), as illustrated in Fig. 1A; (ii) measuring changes
in reflection patterns of distinct lights, typically red-green-blue or
white, internally projected from different directions (25, 32–35),
such as in GelSight sensors (36, 37), as shown in Fig. 1B.
Fig. 1. Mechanochromic tactile sensing: Comparison
with state-of-the-art vision-based sensing strategies
and example of embodiment in a robotic finger.
[image]
Open in a new tab
(A to C) Schematic diagrams of the working principles of the two
most used conventional approaches for vision-based tactile sensing
(marker displacement and directional light reflection), in
comparison with the mechanochromic strategy proposed in this
work. (D) Conceptual illustration of an example of an embodiment
of the mechanochromic sensor, integrated into the structure of an
anthropomorphic robotic finger. (E) Photograph of a prototype
implementation of the sensorized robotic fingertip, where a
transparent elastomeric cap was coated with a small circular patch
(5 mm in diameter) of the mechanochromic bilayer. (F) Examples of
images taken by the robotic fingertip’s internal camera when the
mechanochromic interface contacted different parts of a one-penny
coin (top panels), and corresponding 3D hue maps (bottom panels).
A video of the real-time tactile sensing tests is available as movie
S1.
The second category falls within the broader class of intensity-based
methods, which can use either reflection- or transmission-based
strategies, although the reflection mode is the most investigated
(25, 26). Moreover, hybrid approaches that combine both marker-
based and intensity-based methods have been proposed to leverage
complementary advantages (25, 38–40). Marker-based sensing
enables the detection of contact pressures and surface textures, but
it is inherently constrained in spatial resolution by the markers’
density, i.e., their size and spacing. On the other hand, improved
sensing performance can be achieved with directional light
reflection-based sensing; by using accurate configurations of
illumination and deep learning–based data-driven image processing,
the resolution can be in the order of 100 μm (25, 36, 41, 42).
However, the computational effort required to transform raw tactile
images into three-dimensional (3D) contact maps inherently
introduces latency, due to the multistage processing pipelines
employed in vision-based tactile sensing. Such devices typically
involve photometric calibration, illumination normalization, surface
normal estimation (through photometric stereo techniques), normal
integration for depth reconstruction, and subsequent spatial
mapping, to obtain high-resolution 3D contact geometries and
pressure distributions (36, 43–45).
Here, we introduce a strategy to achieve an unprecedented
combination of high resolution, real-time operation, and inherent
simplicity in vision-based tactile sensing. It uses a stretchable
mechanochromic elastomer that can convert mechanical strains into
spatially resolved structural colors. So far, available
mechanochromic ma