
Methods
Twenty adults (mean ± SD age, 36.1 ± 14.7 years; 50% female)
were affixed with the thigh-worn activPAL and wrist-worn
ActiGraph GT3X+ devices for 7 days. The activPAL was processed
using standard software and five algorithms (ActiLife, Oak, Step
Detection Threshold [SDT], Verisense, and stepcount) were applied
to the ActiGraph data. Participants completed two, 3-hour sessions
during which they were recorded using a GoPro camera. Camera
data were annotated where step counts, activity type, posture and
whole-body movements were labeled. Linear mixed effects
regression and equivalence testing were used to compare each
algorithm’s step counts to direct observation.
Results
Among the wrist algorithms, the mean absolute percent error was
lowest for stepcount (17.1%) and highest for SDT (231.5%)
compared to direct observation. The variance explained was
moderate-to-high (R2 = 0.64–0.90). The stepcount algorithm was
similar to activPAL estimates; both were statistically equivalent to
direct observation at a 15% level and provided similar estimates
over a 7-day period (R2=0.87, MAPE=12.8%). Accuracy was
highest during walking/running for all algorithms, and was lower
and highly variable for biking, modified walking, and mixed
movements, such as pushing a stroller, working at a screen, and
food preparation.
Conclusions
Step count estimates differed among algorithms, however those
measured from the thigh-worn activPAL and the wrist algorithm
stepcount were the most accurate.
Keywords: accelerometer, equivalence, wearables, validation
INTRODUCTION
Over the past 20 years, the proliferation of fitness trackers and
wearable devices has led to increasing interest in stepping behavior
as a measure of physical activity (1). Epidemiologic studies using
devices placed on the wrist and hip have concluded that higher
daily step counts are associated with reduced risk of several chronic
diseases and improved longevity (2–7). In addition, daily step
counts are easily interpretable by the general public and clinicians,
are provided on the majority of consumer wearable devices to
facilitate self-monitoring, and are therefore an attractive potential
target for public health efforts to promote physical activity (8). As
the field evaluates whether there is a sufficient evidence base to
develop a step count target in future iterations of public health
guidelines, concerns remain about the accuracy and comparability
of predicted step counts from the device signal across different
algorithms, attachment sites (e.g., wrist, ankle, hip) and device
models (9).
A major limitation that has plagued this research is a lack of
rigorous evaluation of step counts generated across different devices
and processing methods using gold standard criterion in free-living
settings (10, 11), and the overall low quality of wearable device
validation studies is “evident and alarming” (12). In an attempt to
address this problem, Toth and colleagues were among the first to
evaluate step counting methods from several devices compared to
video-recorded direct observation during free-living activity (9).
They found the ankle-worn StepWatch measured steps accurately
(within 5% of hand-counted steps) while the thigh-worn activPAL
had more error (20%). The performance of the wrist-worn
ActiGraph varied widely depending on the processing criteria used
(25%–120%) (9). Free-living studies using the StepWatch as the
criterion measure in lieu of direct observation have reported similar
findings for the activPAL (13) and wrist-worn devices (13–15).
Given the limited amount of published evidence using gold standard
or acceptable criterion measures, continued evaluation of step
counts generated from different devices, algorithms, and wear
locations in naturalistic environments is needed.
As the field moved to 24-hour wear protocols, and in an effort to
enhance wear-time compliance, many large studies have begun
shifting to the wrist as the attachment site for wearable devices
(16–18). While step counts generated from wrist-worn devices have
had low accuracy in prior studies, advanced step counting
algorithms have recently been made available as open source (19)
and are increasingly being used in large epidemiologic studies of
steps and health outcomes (7, 20–22). The Oak algorithm leverages
walking features of intensity, periodicity, and duration to compute
step counts from vector magnitudes, and these temporal
characteristics are obtained from continuous wavelet transform
(23). Step Detection Threshold (SDT) computes step counts based
on peak detection from the vector magnitude (24). Verisense 2 is
also based on the peak-detection based method (25) and has been
recently refined to improve its accuracy (26). Lastly, OxWearables’s
stepcount was developed using self-supervised machine learning
methods trained on a free-living dataset of step-annotated wrist-
worn accelerometer data (27). Few studies have evaluated the
accuracy of these open-source algorithms compared to a gold-
standard criterion measure in free-living settings and in samples
independent from those in which the models were developed (27).
Therefore, the primary aim of the present paper was to evaluate the
performance of step counts estimated from the thigh-worn
activPAL, the proprietary ActiLife algorithm, and from four open-
source algorithms (Oak, SDT, Verisense, stepcount) applied to the
wrist-worn ActiGraph GT3X+ compared to gold standard video-
recorded direct observation step counts among 20 adults in a free-
living environment. A secondary aim is to compare step counts from
each device from up to 7 days of device wear to inform which wrist-
algorithms provide comparable estimates to a thigh-worn device for
purpose of data pooling and between-study comparisons.
METHODS
Details of the participant recruitment and study procedures are
described elsewhere (28). Briefly, participants were recruited from
San Luis Obispo, CA, from July 2019 to March 2020. Eligibility
criteria included ages 18–75 years, the ability to walk without an
assistive device, and having internet access. Those with physical
limitations that impaired their walking or other major health
conditions that restricted physical activity were excluded. All
participants read and signed an informed consent document that
was approved by the Cal Poly Institutional Review Board. Overall,
53 participants consented to the study, and 24 provided additional
consent to complete a sub-protocol that included two, three-hour
video recorded direct observation sessions.
The study protocol for each participant lasted seven days. At the
first study visit, participants provided informed consent, completed
demographic surveys, and were affixed with the thigh-worn
activPAL and a wrist-worn ActiGraph GT3X+ accelerometers. They
were also asked to complete a previous night sleep diary each
morning from which time out of and into bed each day was
reported and used to define the waking day. The subset who
consented for direct observation scheduled two, three-hour periods
within the seven-days during which they would be continuously
video recorded using a GoPro Hero 5 (GoPro, Inc., San Mateo, CA)
camera. At the end of the seven days, they returned the devices to
study personnel.
Devices
The activPAL3 (PAL Technologies Inc., Glasgow, Scotland) is a
triaxial accelerometer tapped to the right thigh that collects data at
20 Hz. Data were processed using the VANE (v0.1) and CREA
algorithms (v1.3) within the PALAnalysis (v9.1.0.77), and the
resulting event files were further processed by incorporating the
start/stop times for each waking period using the R-package
activPAL processing (v0.4.1). The ActiGraph GT3X+ (Firmware
v1.9.2) is a triaxial accelerometer that was worn on the non-
dominant wrist and was initialized to sample at 80Hz. The raw
ActiGraph data were then processed using the open-source Oak,
SDT, Verisense, and stepcount algorithms and the proprietary
ActiLife.
Algorithms
The proprietary step counting algorithm within the ActiLife
software (v.7.2.0) was utilized to convert the raw ActiGraph data to
1s epochs with calculated step counts. ActiLife has the capability to
output epochs ranging from 1s to 4 min; 1s epochs were selected to
mirror the epochs from direct observation.
The VANE algorithm identifies periods of sitting, standing, and
stepping for the activPAL device, and the dynamic accelerations
during stepping caused by the movement of the thigh and foot
strike detects stepping events (29). The CREA algorithm
subsequently builds on these activity classes to identify periods of
non-wear and cycling (30). All repeated “cyclical” leg movements in
an upright posture are classified as Progressive Leg Movements
(PLM). However, the VANE algorithm classifies cycling PLM as
stepping, so for backwards compatibility cycling PLM is included in
step counts at the epoch level but is excluded in the daily summary
reports by CREA (30). Therefore, epoch-level analyses include
cycling PLM in the total step counts while day-level analyses
excludes them.
Five open-source step counting algorithms for high-resolution wrist
accelerometry data were previously identified (19, 31), and we
examined four of these in our study. We were unable to include the
ADEPT algorithm because ADEPT was developed for stride
segmentation and does not compute step counts directly as part of
its standard output (32).
Oak leverages the fact that during walking, device signal oscillates
around a local mean with an amplitude and frequency equal to
walking speed (23). Peak-to-peak distance is computed into 1s non-
overlapping segments using continuous wavelet transform, and
several tuning parameters are applied to determined marked
walking periods. Oak was implemented using the walking (v.0.4.0)
R package (https://github.com/muschellij2/walking), which uses
the R package reticulate (v.1.44.0) to interface with the original
forest Python package that Oak was developed in.
SDT is a threshold-based pea