
Materials and methods
Study areas
This research has been conducted in 7 study areas situated in
northwestern Italy, spanning the regions of Lombardy, Piedmont,
and Emilia-Romagna: Triangolo Lariano (LAR), Boschi Negri e
Moriano (BNM), Basso Monferrato (MON), Torrente Orba (ORB),
Colline Oltrepò Pavese (COP), Val Tidone (TID), and Valle Staffora
(STA). The study areas exhibit notable diversity in landscape
morphology and composition. In terms of topography, they are
distributed from north to south, encompassing the Lombard Prealps
(LAR), the Po Plain (BNM, MON, and ORB), and the Lombard
Apennines (COP, TID, and STA). Considering landscape
composition, 2 study areas (LAR and STA) are characterized by a
predominant natural landscape with abundant woodlands. A mixed
landscape with woodlands alternating with cultivated fields
characterized the other 2 study areas (BNM and TID). Finally, the
last 3 study areas (MON, ORB, and COP) are characterized by a
predominantly agricultural, that is, modified, landscape with small
and scattered patches of woodland (Figure 1; Supplementary
Material S1: Supplementary Figure S1 and Table S1).
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Location of the study areas in northwestern Italy (LO: Lombardy; PI:
Piedmont; ER: Emilia-Romagna). Map created using QGIS version
3.3 (QGIS Development Team, 2025). Basemap: Esri Light Gray
Canvas © Esri, HERE, Garmin, FAO, NOAA, USGS. Basemap
accessed via XYZ Tiles using the following URL: https://
server.arcgisonline.com/ArcGIS/rest/services/Canvas/
World_Light_Gray_Base/MapServer/tile/{z}/{y}/{x}.
LAR is located in the Prealpine zone of the Lombardy region, an
area characterized by the presence of many lakes. LAR has a
predominant natural landscape with abundant woodlands (79.4% of
the surface) mainly composed of mixed thermophilous species (e.g.,
Ostrya carpinifolia, Acer spp., Fraxinus spp., Tilia spp.), beech (Fagus
sylvatica) and chestnut (Castanea sativa). Agricultural areas are
mainly constituted of arable fodder crops and hay fields (9.5%) and
are restricted to the valley bottoms. Main human activities are
extensive farming, livestock (dairy production), and recreational
activities, such as hunting and hiking.
BNM is located in the Po Plain along the Ticino River in the
Lombardy region. It is characterized by a mixed landscape with an
alternation of woodlands and cultivated lands: mesohygrophile and
multilayered woodlands (Quercus robur and Populus spp.), which are
the remnants of the native forest of the alluvial plain, and riparian
woodlands (Salix spp. and Alnus glutinosa) represent a continuous
canopy along the river, whereas arable lands (38.0%; mainly maize,
other cereals, and paddies) are predominant among the agricultural
patches. Main human activities are intensive farming (cereal
production) and recreational activities, such as hiking and biking;
the area is also frequented by dogs and their owners. BNM is largely
included in the Natural Park “Valle del Ticino Lombardo Regional
Park” (91.8% of the protected area). In this area, hunting is
forbidden.
MON is a foothill area located along the Po River in the Piedmont
region. MON lies in an intensive agricultural landscape, where
crops, mainly maize (13.6%) and paddies (10.5%), are cultivated
over large fields, and poplar plantations (15.2%) are widespread.
Within this agricultural landscape, there is a floodplain natural area
(462 ha), where riparian woodland is mainly composed of Salix
spp., Quercus spp., and Robinia pseudoacacia. Main human activities
are intensive farming (cereal production) and hunting. MON is
partially included in the Natural Park “Po Piemontese Regional
Park” (43.5% of protected area), where hunting is forbidden.
ORB is located in the Po Plain along the Orba Stream in the
Piedmont region. ORB is characterized by an agricultural landscape
made up of many small, diversified patches. Arable lands (65.0%)
are allocated, for example, to maize and other cereals, alfalfa,
vegetables, and sunflowers, and are alternated to hay fields (6.9%).
Whereas woodlands, mainly composed of Populus spp. and Salix
spp. or R. pseudoacacia, are restricted to the small almost
continuous canopy along the Orba stream (12.9%). Main human
activities are farming and hunting. A small portion of ORB is
included in the Nature Reserve of the Orba Stream (14.2% of the
protected area), where hunting is forbidden.
COP is a hilly area located in the Apennines between the Lombardy
and Emilia-Romagna regions. It is characterized by vast vineyard
cultivations (69.4%), whereas woodlands are represented by small
isolated patches scattered among vineyards (6.5%). Main human
activities are intensive farming (wine production) and hunting.
TID lies between the upper hills and the mountains of the
Apennines between Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna regions. TID is
characterized by a mixed landscape where woodlands are alternated
with cultivated lands, mainly constituted of rotational crops (alfalfa
and wheat or barley; 37.9%). Broad-leaved woodlands are
predominant (37.9%) and composed of thermophilous species
dominated by Quercus pubescens in association with Quercus petraea,
Quercus cerris, Fraxinus ornus, O. carpinifolia, and Acer campestre.
Shrublands are also widespread (13.0%). Main human activities are
extensive farming, husbandry (mainly cattle), and, among
recreational ones, hunting and motocross.
STA is a mountainous area located in the Apennines between
Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna regions. Woodlands are
predominant (70.1%): among broad-leaved species, beech (F.
sylvatica) and chestnut (C. sativa) are widespread; among conifers,
Pinus nigra, Picea abies, and Larix decidua are the main species.
Alongside woodlands, well-structured shrublands are present
(8.5%). Agricultural areas are mainly constituted of hay fields
(17.9%). Main human activities are extensive husbandry (mainly
cattle) and, among recreational ones, hunting and motocross.
In LAR, BNM, and MON, the wolf was absent or occasionally
present during the study period, whereas in ORB, COP, TID, and
STA, it was present with stable packs. In ORB, the pack was
