
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES AND
RESULTS
Twenty LC-MS/MS runs of fractionated HeLa S3 cell lysate were
acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode on an LTQ/Orbitrap
classic (Thermo Scientific) system hyphenated to a nanoflow HPLC
system (Eksigent). The survey scan range was limited to m/z 400–
2000 at a nominal resolution of 60,000, and MS/MS scans were
limited to the eight most abundant precursor ions. The resulting
raw data files were converted to mzML using the ProteoWizard (1)
tool set, mzML files were converted to mz5, and the identity of the
mzML and mz5 file contents was confirmed. For all formats, the
data were stored in compressed double precision. For the mzXML
and mzML formats, indexing was turned on. All of the experiments
were conducted using the same hardware, with all resources
dedicated to the test runs (no parallel jobs). Overall, we consider
the selected data set to be a reasonably common example of LC-MS/
MS data acquisition and hence expect that the results generalize to
a large majority of practical use cases.
To assess mz5 performance, we conducted three types of
comparative experiments, testing (i) write performance; (ii) read
performance; and (iii) space requirements. For each of the 20 input
files, we generated a set of 10 subsets of increasing sizes (sets of
800, 1600, up to 8000 spectra, and the complete set of all spectra
present in the respective input file). This strategy yielded 220 test
cases. All of the time measurements were averaged over 10 repeats
for every test case, after discarding the minimum and maximum
timings. For performance comparisons between different formats,
we fitted linear models with intercepts and determined relative
slopes over time and space (see supplemental materials). mz5 files
were used to generate each test case for mzXML, mzML, and mz5, to
guarantee that all three file formats contain the same data.
To test linear read performance, we measure the time it takes to
read each of the test cases from the file it is stored in. Fig. 1a shows
the linear read times of all test cases versus the number of (m/z,
abundance) pairs. The mz5 format outperforms the mzXML and
mzML formats by factors of ∼2.3 and ∼3.7, respectively. We note in
passing that the mz5 gains over mzML are not strictly linear; this
indicates optimization opportunities for the parsing of smaller
mzML files. Interestingly, the mz5 linear read times also exhibit
smaller variation compared with mzXML and, in particular, mzML
read times.
For strictly random reading, mz5 is significantly faster than mzML
but performs slightly slower than mzXML. This is due to the
underlying HDF5 caching/compression tradeoff. We focused on the
vast majority of conceivable use cases and geared the tradeoff
toward efficient linear reading. The random read and initialization
performance tests, as well as benchmarks for different mass
analyzer types, can be found in the supplemental materials.
To test write performance, we extracted every test case from the
respective mz5 input file and measured the time it takes to write the
data to disk, using mzXML, mzML, and mz5. Consequently, potential
read time delays only cause a constant offset that is identical
between the different formats and does not affect the slopes.
supplemental Fig. 1a illustrates the results for all 220 test cases.
Time measurements for mzXML, mzML, and mz5 are shown as
diamonds, triangles, and circles, respectively. It is apparent that mz5
is consistently faster than mzXML and mzML. The read time-
corrected relative slopes show improvements of a factor of ∼4.7 for
mz5 over mzXML and ∼3.9 over mzML (Table I).
Table I. Average read/write times and space
requirements for 106 (m/z, abundance) pairs for the
mz5, mzML, and mzXML file formats.
The rows correspond to the linear read time (tlr), the write time
(tw), the mz5 read time − corrected write time (tw − tlrmz5) and
the space requirements. All of the timing values are in seconds or
MB/106 data points, respectively. Columns 4 and 5 show that mz5
outperforms the mzML and mzXML formats in all respects.
mz5 mzML mzXML mzML/mz5 mzXML/mz5
tlr
0.13 0.49
0.3
3.65
2.28
tw
0.63 2.08
2.46
3.28
3.9
tw − tlrmz5 0.5
1.95
2.33
3.89
4.66
Space
7.57 13.72
14.13
1.81
1.87
Open in a new tab
Fig. 1b illustrates storage consumption versus the number of (m/z,
abundance) pairs. It is evident that the mz5 format requires little
more than half the disk space (54%) of the mzXML and mzML
formats. The mzXML and mzML storage requirements are practically
identical. Fig. 1c illustrates that mz5 even supersedes XML-based
formats that are compressed at the file and spectrum levels for off-
line long term storage. Hence, mz5 provides better compression
levels while still offering immediate data access and avoiding the
need for time-consuming file level compression and decompression.
Fig. 1c also provides a rough comparison of space requirements for
three popular proprietary vendor formats (Thermo raw, Bruker yep,
and ABSciex wiff) against the open mzXML, mzML, and mz5
formats. The mz5 format compares very favorably against the
Thermo and Bruker formats and is the best open alternative for the
ABSciex format. The Bruker yep file data was generated from
Escherichia coli whole cell lysate and was acquired on a Bruker
amaZon instrument. The ABSciex wiff file data stems from
subcellular fractions of a HeLa cell lysate and was analyzed by LC/
MS on an TripleTOF 5600.
Implementation
The mz5 format maps the mzML ontology, as implemented in the
ProteoWizard library, into a collection of HDF5 objects. The HDF5
library provides HDF5 object persistence.
The design of mz5 is tailored to meet two specific goals: to create an
open exchange format with both I/O speed and storage space
requirements that rival existing vendor formats. The practical
challenge was to develop data representations that enable the use of
the HDF5 properties conducive to the above goals. In mz5, we
represent mzML tags as HDF5 compound data types, which
correspond to classical abstract data types. Collections of
compounds are stored in instances of a multidimensional array type
(H5::data set). Instances are compressed and stored to disk. It
should be noted that the straightforward representation of mzML
tags in terms of HDF5 groups is not a viable solution, because such
an approach would prohibit data compression for technical reasons.
The HDF5 library is already highly optimized for file I/O (17). The
mz5 implementation guarantees optimized buffer sizes to minimize
the number of necessary I/O operations, collecting raw data before
bulk writes are performed. HDF5 natively supports compression
filters, and to optimize compression rates, our implementation
