
Methods
Here we present a new computational method for quantifying gut
peristalsis in preclinical mouse models that requires only a video
taken using a mobile phone camera. Our analytical pipeline
processes the videographic data to track motion as it correlates to
gastrointestinal transit.
Results
This method is compatible with different mouse models (such as
conventionally housed and germ‐free), gut microbiome
compositions, and can further be used to screen the impact of drugs
on gut motility, which we demonstrate using methacholine as an
example. Quantitative peristalsis measurements after methacholine
treatment of conventionally housed and germ‐free mice with or
without reconstitution of their gut microbiomes demonstrate that
our analytical method can detect and quantify changes in peristalsis
driven not only by endogenous acetylcholine signaling but also by
colonic anatomy and the microbiome.
Conclusion
We envision that our computational tool will find uses in preclinical
drug or mouse model screenings and forms the cornerstone to
expand this methodology to other non‐gastrointestinal applications.
Keywords: computational, method, motility, peristalsis,
smartphone
Key Points
•  A new computational method for quantifying gut peristalsis
in live animals.
•  Requires videos taken using a smartphone camera and our
analytical pipeline.
•  Our methodology can be expanded to multiple applications
including peristaltic assessments of rodent gastrointestinal
disease models, screening novel compounds for off and on
target gastrointestinal effects, and quantifying body wall
movements of other muscle groups.
Plain Language Summary
Many diseases and medical interventions affect gut motility. But
quantitative methods for measuring gut motility in live animals are
uncommon, cumbersome, and lack standardization. To address this
unmet need, we present a new computational method for
quantifying gut motility in preclinical mouse models that requires
only a video taken using a mobile phone camera. This method is
compatible with different mouse models and across distinct gut
microbiome compositions (we demonstrate its use for measuring
gut motility in conventionally housed mice, germ‐free mice, and
germ‐free mice whose microbiomes were subsequently
reconstituted). It can further be applied to different preclinical
scenarios such as screening of drugs and probiotics, studying the
effects of different microbiome compositions, and screening
preclinical mouse models. Additionally, our method is amenable for
use beyond its application in gastrointestinal motility and could be
further enhanced by integrating advances in AI like video
processing neural networks.
A new computational method and analytical pipeline for
quantifying gut peristalsis in live mouse models that involves taking
a video using a smartphone camera and then processing the
videographic data using our custom analytical pipeline to quantify
gastrointestinal motility.
[image]
1. Introduction
Peristalsis forms the basis of the involuntary physiological
gastrointestinal (GI) muscle contraction and relaxation that propels
chyme through the digestive tract, representing a major mechanism
of gut motility. The peristaltic contractions in the alimentary canal
are initiated by a number of interrelated signals, many of which are
mediated by the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC), pacemaker cells in
the GI tract [1]. The ICC interface with smooth muscle,
parasympathetic neurons, and enteric neurons [2], which can
stimulate gut movement through release of acetylcholine in the
postprandial stage, or motilin to stimulate migratory motility
complexes in the fasting or inter‐digestive phases [3]. Acetylcholine
acting on M3 muscarinic receptors on smooth muscle cells [4] and
ICC [5] facilitates calcium‐dependent [6, 7] muscle contractions [8]
to propel chyme in the anterograde direction.
Dysregulation of GI motility can result from a number of diseases
and is also a typical side effect of many commonly used drugs like
NSAIDS, antidepressants, and colchicine [9]. Gastroparesis, chronic
intestinal pseudo‐obstruction, or neuromuscular junction disorders
like myasthenia gravis are characterized by reduced rates of
peristaltic contractions and can result in constipation or
malnutrition [10, 11]. On the other hand, pathologies such as
hyperthyroidism may increase gut motility and cause diarrhea [12].
While some of these disorders arise in adulthood, congenital
diseases like Hirschsprung disease result in abnormal or absent
peristaltic motility from birth [13]. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
may result in diarrhea or constipation, due to fast or slow
peristalsis, respectively. Furthermore, numerous classes of drugs
have well‐characterized positive or negative effects on GI motility.
For example, prokinetic drugs, a class including acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors, dopamine antagonists, and serotonergic agonists,
increase peristalsis and gastric emptying, while opioids, selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, antihistamines, and many other
classes of drugs inhibit peristalsis and lead to constipation.
Due to these common drug actions on gastrointestinal motility,
many methodologies for visualizing, measuring, and quantifying gut
motility are currently in clinical use. These include procedures like
antroduodenal manometry (which requires invasive catheterization
[14]) as well as non‐invasive techniques such as gadolinium‐ or
manganese‐contrast magnetic resonance imaging, which offer high
resolution of soft tissue but are costly, time consuming, and affected
by positioning and breathing [15, 16]. Many related procedures
have availability limited to specific tertiary settings and suffer from
a lack of standardized protocols [17]. Recently, body surface gastric
mapping (BSGM) and ultrasound have been offered as inexpensive,
non‐invasive methods of measuring gastrointestinal motility in
point‐of‐care settings. BSGM is a promising new technology that
utilizes an array of electrodes placed onto the body [18] with recent
FDA approval; however, it is currently limited to gastric mapping
and lacks multiple key standardization studies [18, 19]. Intestinal
ultrasound shows similar promise, allowing high‐resolution
visualization of rhythmic intestinal movements in real time in the
small intestine [20] and colon [21]. The drawbacks to ultrasound,
however, include difficulty visualizing movement when
gastrointestinal fluid volume varies amongst patients [22],
sometimes necessitating polyethylene glycol laxative ingestion [23],
and challenges in standardizing the method to generate
reproducible results across modalities [24].
To address these shortcomings, many new methodologies are
currently being evaluated using preclinical animal models. For
example, ultrasonography on anesthetized live mice shows promise,
as it does in clinical settings [25], and trans‐illumination near‐
infrared technology has been used to generate detailed
spatiotemporal mapping of the gastrointestinal tracts of freely
moving live mice [26]. Novel dyes for use with near‐infrared
imaging have shown further promise in enhancing gastrointestinal
resolution for visualization of peristalsis [27]. While encouraging,
these technologies require specialized equipment to generate
images. Videography, on the other hand, has been in development
for the capture and analysis of uterine movement in mice [28], and
represents a methodological advancement primarily due to its low
barrier to entry. Recent developments in artificial intelligence (AI)
and computational analysis have shown promise to enhance
analysis of video data; however, there remains an unmet need for
quantitative, standardized tools which can measure intestinal
motility via videography. Such a tool could find application at the
preclinical stage to characterize effects of drugs or diseases on
gastrointestinal motility in animal models, and eventually in point‐
of‐care clinical settings for diagnostic or prognostic usage.
In this study, we present a novel computational tool for visualizing
and evaluating gut peristalsis in live animals. Our approach
involves recording gut motility using a smartphone camera and
quantifying motility with a customized video analytical pipeline.
We demonstrate the promise of our tool in both the quantification
of peristaltic movement as well as for screening the effects of drug
concentrations on gastrointestinal motility in conjunction with the
FlexiVent ventilator system [29], which allows rapid and controlled
administration of nebulized drugs.
2. Methods
2.1. Maintenance of Germ‐Free Animals and Animal
Welfare
Mice were maintained in germ‐free conditions in the CWRU
gnotobiotic core using the nested isolation system [30] and were
regularly tested for contamination by performing standard testing
including 16S rRNA sequencing, fecal cultures, and gram staining.
All procedures were carried out in accordance with the National
Institutes of Health guidelines for care and use of laboratory
animals and were approved (4/22/19–4/30/27, protocols
#20140158 and #20140035) by the Case Western Reserve
University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Assurance
Number A‐3145‐01).
2.2. Gavage of Germ‐Free Animals
Each of the 4–8‐week‐old germ‐free mice were orally gavaged with
1 × 108 E. coli strain BW25113 obtained from the KEIO collection
from the Coli Genetic Stock Center (CGSC) at Yale University that
had been grown overnight in SOC media at 37°C and then
resuspended in 300 μL of sterile PBS. This gavage was repeated after
1 week. Limiting dilution assay of fecal samples from gavaged mice
demonstrated 3.37 ± 0.39 × 107 colony‐forming units on LB
medium. Similarly, 4–8‐week‐old GF mice were orally gavaged with
300 μL PBS that contained normal microbiome that was prepared by
resuspending and vortexing fecal material collected from
conventionally housed mice in sterile PBS, followed by
centrifugation at 3000×g for 1 min to obtain supernatant for oral
gavage. Thi