
Methods
A prospective community-based cohort of men and women aged
40 years or over within the East Midlands region (UK) will be
recruited via a postal questionnaire from their general practices.
The questionnaire will enquire about: presence and onset of KP;
pain severity (0–10 numerical rating scale (NRS)); pain
catastrophizing and neuropathic-like pain (NP) using the
painDETECT questionnaires (definite NP scores ≥19–38); risk
factors for KP and/or osteoarthritis (OA) (age, body mass index,
constitutional knee alignment, nodal OA, index: ring finger length
(2D4D) ratio); quality of life (SF12); and mental health (Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Scale). Clinical assessments will be
undertaken in a sample of 400 participants comprising three
groups: early KP (≤3 year’s duration), established KP (>3 years)
and no KP. Assessments will include knee radiographs (standing
semi-flexed and 300 skyline views); knee ultrasound (synovial
effusion, hypertrophy, and Doppler activity); quantitative sensory
testing; muscle strength (quadriceps, hip abductor, and hand-grip);
balance; gait analysis (GAITrite); and biomarker sampling. A repeat
questionnaire will be sent to responders at years 1 and 3. The
baseline early KP group will undergo repeat assessments at year 1
(apart from radiographs) and year 3 (with radiographs). Any
incident KP individuals identified at year 1 or 3 questionnaires will
have clinical and radiographic assessments at the respective time
points.
Discussion
Baseline data will be used to examine risk factors for early onset KP
and to identify KP phenotypes. Subsequent prospective data, at least
to Year 3, will allow examination of the natural history of KP and
risk factors for incidence and progression.
Trial registration
The study was registered on the clinicaltrials.gov portal:
NCT02098070) on the 14th of March 2014.
Background
Knee pain (KP) is a very common musculoskeletal condition and is
a leading cause of disability in people aged over 50 years [1].
Approximately 1 in 4 people in the UK general population have KP
in this age group [2–4], largely attributed to the presence of
underlying knee osteoarthritis (OA).
The relationship between KP and knee OA is complex and there is
often a marked discordance between structural joint changes and
clinical symptoms [5]. Most studies focus on late or established OA
in people who may have had pain for many years, and few studies
have examined recent onset KP and “early” clinical OA. Although
people with more persistent and long-standing troublesome KP are
most likely to seek medical attention and subsequently be labelled
as having knee OA [6], they often represent the more severe end of
the knee pain and knee OA spectrum [7]. However, KP is the
malady, not knee OA [8]. There is a need to understand the natural
history of knee pain from point of onset through the fluctuations of
the pain experience including changes in pain type and severity and
eventual progression in some to severe, established daily KP. By
understanding the risk factors for early onset KP as part of the
spectrum of KP, we have the opportunity to target, treat and
manage KP symptoms earlier and more effectively, thus potentially
preventing the development of a more painful and functionally
impaired joint.
In addition to the deleterious effects of the well-documented
structural changes of knee OA [9–11], early KP could acquire
characteristics of more severe and even neuropathic-like pain (NP)
through central rather than peripheral mechanisms. For example,
increased central sensitisation of nociceptive pathways where an
enhanced localised pain response spreads from the source to
adjacent regions may lead to diffuse and more severe regional KP
[12, 13]. Also, there may be ineffective pain inhibitory mechanisms
[14] due to impaired conditioned pain modulation (CPM) that in
people with KP and/or knee OA could cause not only an enhanced
pain response but more diffuse KP and a tendency to other regional
body pain. In fact, over a quarter of older adults with chronic
symptomatic knee OA present with NP suggesting that neuropathic
mechanisms are contributing to the pain experience [15]. Soni et al
[16] reported that KP at baseline was predictive of a significantly
higher risk of subsequent knee symptoms (9% persistent KP and
29% intermittent KP) and that those with radiographic OA,
symptoms of depression and multiple regional pain were more
likely to have constant pain while those with inconstant pain
reported better function and quadriceps strength. OA is therefore
not a static disease with pain as its main symptom evolving over
time. It has been suggested that in the early stages KP is more likely
to be mild and intermittent, whereas in the later stages pain
persistence and intensity increase [17]. However, this relationship
is not always linear and one in four people with KP report that pain
has been stable or even improved since its onset [18]. Furthermore,
it is possible that the effect of risk factors on pain will change as the
pain progresses due to changes both in peripheral and central
mechanisms of pain production and modulation.
There are several constitutional and biomechanical risk factors
associated with knee pain such as age, body mass index, knee injury
and knee alignment [19]. However, apart from structural joint
changes, other local or more general person-specific factors (for
example, pain, genetic polymorphisms or psychosocial factors)
appear likely to influence KP experience and severity and to
associate with different outcomes [13, 20, 21]. Such factors,
however, have been studied rarely in a general population setting.
Characteristics include pain type (such as NP or intermittent or
constant pain presentations), pain responses (reduced pain pressure
thresholds (PPT)), psychosocial factors (sleep patterns, anxiety and
depression and pain catastrophising), biomechanical factors
(alignment, proprioceptive ability, and muscle strength/weakness),
genetic factors and pathophysiological biomarkers measured in
blood or urine. Therefore, with the use of a questionnaire and
subsequent clinical assessments, we can examine the relationship
between different phenotypes and pain severity, functional
limitation and quality of life. The ultimate goal is to assist clinicians
and health care providers to select the most appropriate
intervention for individual patients according to their phenotypic
characteristics, to achieve better outcomes with fewer complications
from available interventions.
Objectives:
1. To better understand the natural history of KP
2. To determine the prevalence of different phenotypes of KP
(including features suggesting central pain sensitisation)
within the general population
3. To determine the relationship between different phenotypes
and pain severity, functional limitation and quality of life
4. To identify possible novel associations with each phenotype
5. To examine the change of KP and associated factors over time
Methods
Design
This is a prospective general population cohort study. The main
design is to obtain questionnaire data from a large proportion of the
local adult population aged 40 and over, and to undertake
assessments in a sample of respondents at baseline and then at Year
1 and Year 3 follow-up. More prolonged follow-up, as well as
additional nested studies, will be considered subject to scientific
review, further ethics committee approvals and funding.
Ethics
All aspects of this study were approved by the Nottingham Research
