
Methods
The study was retrospective, descriptive, and quantitative. An
anonymized questionnaire was sent via Survey Monkey® to the
nine SAAHs to determine nuclear medicine patient numbers by scan
type, identify cameras, equipment, staffing levels, commonly used
radiopharmaceuticals, and define the basic requirements for
establishing new facilities.
Results
The response rate was 78% (7/9 hospitals). Average number of NM
patients seen per hospital was 7,040 for 2022. All hospitals had
SPECT-CT cameras; six had PET-CT cameras and one referred PET
patients to a private hospital. All hospitals had NM physicians
(range 2–13, average 5) and at least one medical physicist (range 1–
4). Only two hospitals had radiopharmacists (only one in each).
Conclusion
To promote optimal patient services and support research in SAAHs,
norms must be developed that are applicable to Africa. Appropriate
staff quotas and equipment are required for the African setting to
promote optimal use of radiopharmaceuticals and enable NMs to
operate to their full potential. Key things to help in planning and
establishing new radiopharmacy centers include; adopting
centralized radiopharmaceutical production and aligning staffing
with international guidelines.
Keywords: nuclear medicine, PET-CT, radiopharmaceuticals,
radiopharmacy, SPECT-CT, staffing norms
1. Introduction
Nuclear medicine plays a critical role in imaging of the human
body's internal organ systems to provide visual representations of
metabolic processes in specific organs (1). It utilises small amounts
of radiopharmaceutical products which are vectors tagged to
radioactive atoms. These radiopharmaceuticals are administered in
the body for diagnosis and treatment of serious medical conditions
(1). Diagnostic radiopharmaceuticals, once administered in the
body, localize in target organs and emit radiation which is captured
on external detectors, enabling imaging of the disease extent in the
body. Molecular imaging enables medical practitioners to make
appropriate and personalized decisions for each and every patient
(2). Therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals once in the body are taken
up by target cells and emit radiation that leads to the death of the
targeted cells (3).
Globally, nuclear medicine plays an important role in the patient
management matrix. Nuclear medicine services uptake has
increased over time in many developed countries (4). In Africa,
there have also been developments made in nuclear medicine. In
2022 there were reported to be 17 planar-only gamma cameras, 132
gamma cameras, 87 SPECT gamma cameras, 28 SPECT-CT gamma
cameras, 11 PET scanners and 6 cyclotrons in Africa (5). South
Africa and North African countries have similar development
patterns to some developed countries while other African countries
have lagged far behind (4).
South Africa (SA) has an established infrastructure for the
production of radionuclides (6). SA offers post-graduate training in
nuclear medicine and radiopharmacy and has partnered with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to provide regional
training courses which support African countries.
An audit of patient statistics in just two South African academic
hospitals in Johannesburg from January 2004 to December 2019
showed that a total of 120,033 nuclear medicine procedures were
performed over the period (7). This number shows that there is
demand for nuclear medicine and radiopharmacy services which
can be attributed to the shift from communicable to non-
communicable diseases and new disease outbreaks bringing to the
fore the need to strengthen health systems especially with regards
to nuclear medicine which plays a vital role in the diagnosis and
treatment of some of these diseases (8). This increased need will
require further research to develop new radiopharmaceuticals,
establish nuclear medicine and radiopharmacy centres and train
staff in these areas. There will also be a need for health care
managers to have important information which can be determined
from service uptake trends in already -existing nuclear and
radiopharmacy centres which they can use for planning of new
nuclear medicine and radiopharmacy services and predicting future
needs for expansion of existing facilities.
The high costs of nuclear medicine infrastructure,
radiopharmaceuticals and specialist staff dictate that proper
planning be done before establishing these centres, so that services
may be tailored towards needs and be sustainable, especially in
low-resource settings. It is in this regard, that an analysis of
radiopharmacy services at South African academic hospitals was
carried out to give updated data on the types of scans that are
carried out, the commonly used radiopharmaceuticals, the staffing
levels and the patient statistics. The findings were used to define
the basic requirements needed for the establishment of new
radiopharmacy centres in similar settings.
2. Materials and methods
The study was retrospective, descriptive, and quantitative. It
involved sending out anonymized questionnaires to heads of
department in the nine South African Academic Hospitals for the
year 2022. The questionnaire was generated through Survey
Monkey®. A preliminary statement explained that continuation
with the survey indicated consent. The questionnaire collected
information regarding the hospital bed capacity, the total outpatient
statistics, nuclear medicine patient statistics against scan types,
staffing levels and needs, and the availability of different types of
equipment.
The data collected was provided by the respective nuclear medicine
departments and since it was obtained from their databases, it was
deemed reliable. The data shows a true reflection of patient
statistics for the departments and utilization of radiopharmaceutical
services since the nuclear medicine and radiopharmacy centers
recorded their patient data. Consistency was achieved by the use of
a similar data collection form across the identified hospitals. The
use of 2022 data enhanced validity while the data collection form
had been tailored to include IAEA parameters that included
radiopharmaceuticals used, equipment and facilities present and
types of scans. This also ensured that errors were minimized and
that only necessary data was captured.
There are different types of bias and the main potential types of
bias in this study were addressed as follows;
•  Selection bias did not arise as the researcher included all
academic hospitals with Nuclear Medicine Departments in
South Africa.
•  Interviewer bias did not arise as no interviews were
conducted.
•  Recall bias was minimised by concentrating only on data for
the year 2022.
•  Acquiescence bias did not occur as there were no questions
that elicited a favourable answer as binary responses were not
part of the questions in the questionnaire.
•  Social desirability bias was also eliminated as respondents
were anonymised.
•  Non-response bias may have arisen even though the
researcher kept the questionnaire as simple as possible with
minimal questions which had clear wording and instruction.
An analysis of patient statistics data was performed by categorizing
scans as either SPECT, PET or as radionuclide therapy. The most
frequently used radiopharmaceuticals were identified. A comparison
of the patient statistics in terms of numbers of nuclear medicine
scans performed in the year 2022 was done. Staff to patient scan
ratios comparisons were also made.
The number of each cadre of staff working in the respective nuclear
medicine departments was also determined. Data obtained was
compared with the IAEA staff modelling recommendations which
also relates to the IAEA Operational levels. The comparison was to
determine whether the IAEA staff modelling levels were achievable
for new radiopharmacy centers (5).
3. Results
The results obtained from the seven responding academic hospitals
are grouped as follows:
•  Nuclear medicine patient numbers by scan type for the year
2022.
•  Radiopharmaceuticals used.
•  Cameras and equipment in the various nuclear medicine
departments.
•  Staffing levels for the various nuclear medicine departments.
•  Additional staff stated to be required in each hospital.
The response rate was 78% (7/9) hospitals. Over the nine hospitals,
bed numbers ranged from 450 to 3,400 beds. Of the seven
responding hospitals, bed numbers ranged from 846 to 1,650 beds.
Only two hospitals reported hospital outpatient numbers for 2022
(427,465 and 107,478 respectively). In two of the responding
hospitals, the ratio of in-patients to outpatients seen in the nuclear
medicine department was 1:6 and 1:17. This is a clear indication
that the majority of patients seen in the respective nuclear medicine
departments were outpatients.
3.1. Overview of nuclear medicine patient numbers
by scan type for the year 2022
All seven hospitals carried out PET and SPECT scans and
radionuclide therapy in the year 2022. The total nuclear medicine
patients seen was 24,164 (mean per hospital 3,452 ± 1,103.8 SD.
Patient numbers across the responding hospitals ranged between
1,762 and 4,702. In summary, Figure 1 shows the comparison of
patient statistics against PET, SPECT and radionuclide therapy
carried out in 2022 in South African academic hospitals that
participated in this study.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Patient numbers for PET, SPECT and radionuclide therapy for the
seven SA academic hospitals, 2022.
3.1.1. PET scans and radiopharmaceuticals
In the seven hospitals, a total of 7,150 patients underwent PET
scans in the year 2022 (average 1,021 patients per hospital +/-
581.6 SD). [18F] F-FDG was the highest used positron emitter with
5,247 patients (average750 +/- 377.8 SD) with patient number
ranges of 76 to 1,226 across the responding hospitals followed by
[68Ga] Ga-PSMA with a total of 1,236 patients (average 177 +/-
190.3 SD) with patient ranges of 27 to 600.
Figure 2 shows the total number of patients who underwent PET
scans in the seven hospi