
Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization, Validation,
Visualization, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Writing –
review & editing
Find articles by Nimrod Kruger
1,*, Nicholas Owen Ralph
Nicholas Owen Ralph
1International Centre for Neuromorphic Systems, The MARCS
Institute, Western Sydney University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Data curation,
Visualization
Find articles by Nicholas Owen Ralph
1, Gregory Cohen
Gregory Cohen
1International Centre for Neuromorphic Systems, The MARCS
Institute, Western Sydney University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Writing – original draft,
Resources
Find articles by Gregory Cohen
1, Paul Hurley
Paul Hurley
1International Centre for Neuromorphic Systems, The MARCS
Institute, Western Sydney University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
2Centre for Research in Mathematics and Data Science, Western
Sydney University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Writing – original draft,
Conceptualization
Find articles by Paul Hurley
1,2
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13227969  PMID: 42238821
Abstract
Event Vision Sensors, or neuromorphic cameras, report sparse, and
asynchronous image change-related data and enable microsecond-
scale sensing and high dynamic range, but challenge physics-based
sensor design approaches. In response to log-intensity threshold-
crossing instances, this event representation does not readily
integrate with forward operators used to describe most
computational imaging and optical systems. We present a physics-
grounded processing pipeline that maps event streams to estimates
of per-pixel log-intensity and its derivatives, and embeds these
measurements in a dynamic linear systems model with a time-
varying Point-Spread Function (PSF). This enables inverse filtering
directly from event data via frequency-domain Wiener
deconvolution with a known dynamic transfer function, enabling
scene inference even when no image is formed on the sensor plane.
We validated the approach in simulation for single and overlapping
point-sources under modulated defocus, and on real event data from
a tunable-focus telescope imaging a star field, demonstrating
superior source localization and separability compared with frame-
based imaging. The proposed framework provides a practical bridge
between event sensing and model-based computational imaging for
dynamic optical systems.
Keywords: computational imaging, dynamic linear system, event-
vision sensors, neuromorphic engineering, Point Spread Function
(PSF)
1. Introduction
An Event Vision Sensors (EVS) approximately represents
asynchronous log-intensity changes dLdt, where L ≡ log(I), rather
than direct absolute intensity I, as is common for conventional
frame-based sensors. In these complementary metal–oxide–
semiconductor (CMOS) sensors, a timely per-pixel event of log-
intensity threshold crossing is reported relative to an internal
reference level, followed by updating that level in anticipation of
the next crossing event. The ability of EVS to report changes at
microsecond resolution and to achieve a high dynamic range
compared to most image sensors is driving many event-based
applications in computer vision. However, representing these events
in a physics-grounded manner, so that their information can be
processed using a dynamic linear systems approach, has not been
thoroughly explored in the literature. A linear system description
can be used to relate a full scene to the spatial-temporal event-
stream output, informed by physical modeling of the optics and
sensor, as is often used to design fast inference of a scene in frame-
based computer-vision tasks. Currently, most EVS physics-grounded
approaches first create a full image-from-events reconstruction, use
the scene intensity constancy assumption, or both (Zhang et al.,
2022). These typically assume the conventional pinhole camera
model, with a sensor array that roughly maps the angular scene
intensity, and are useful for recording through traditional in-focus
imaging lenses. However, the pinhole camera model and scene
intensity constancy assumption are not always applicable for a
generalized imaging system.
The desire to recover more scene information in highly dynamic
scenes, in applications such as robotics, industrial inspection, and
medicine, has led to the proliferation of work using EVS for
computational imaging. These include EVS plenoptic cameras (Qu
et al., 2024), microscopy (Bian et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025;
Baird et al., 2025), wavefront sensing (Kong et al., 2020), coded
aperture (Shah et al., 2024; Habuchi et al., 2024), lens-less imaging
(You et al., 2025), and more (Arja et al., 2025; Cai et al., 2025; Zhu
et al., 2024a)—collectively coined Computational Neuromorphic
Imaging (CNI) (Zhu et al., 2024b). This is an emerging field that
aims to expand EVS to overcome the latency-bandwidth-sensitivity
bottlenecks of traditional imaging, while maintaining low system
costs, energy consumption, and data bandwidth.
Computational imaging system designs often use a forward operator
that maps a transfer function from scene intensity, light field, or
complex wavefront to the sensor readout signal. Scalar-theory
methods (e.g., angular spectrum and Fresnel approximation) can be
used to predict sensor response to scene illumination, and also
design systems for extracting specific information under various
assumptions and priors (Joseph, 1968). With event-stream's unique
data structure of binary threshold crossing response to log-intensity
and asynchronous sampling mode, the transfer function definition
and the information we put through the system are not directly
obtained. Consequently, current CNI designs often reuse optical
methods proven for frame-based imaging, thereby reducing
performance. Alternatively, successful data-driven approaches will
be hard-pressed to extrapolate, missing model-based
parameterization.
We propose a refreshed view of log-intensity change events in the
context of linear optical systems, paving the way for CNI models
and methods. This will expand the range of design possibilities for
machine vision systems, microscopy, and advanced optical sensors.
The following components are presented:
1. Log-intensity derivative revisited: we describe the relation
between a pixel's log-intensity threshold-crossing event
stream to the per-event estimate of log-intensity derivative,
intensity, and intensity derivative, for the limited case of a
simple event pixel model.
2. Dynamic imaging system model: describe a linear forward
model for optical signals transferred through a system with
internally controlled dynamics, represented by the operator
T(t), and projected onto a sensor plane. The expected
intensity and its changes are related to the information
encoded in the event stream.
3. Scene-informed spatial-temporal filter: an example spatial-
temporal transfer function is used to design a filter as an
inverse operator on event-data to extract scene estimation.
A direct path from event-stream to scene inference is then
facilitated by the combined use of event interpolation, known
optical transfer functions (with controlled system parameters), and
scene priors.
We demonstrated this path using a simulated optical model of an
imaging system with a modulated focal length, and on real-world
EVS data of a star field taken with a tunable liquid-lens imaging
system. In these, the introduced controlled dynamics are achieved
by the active focus and defocus of the Point-Spread Function of a
static point source (or a star field) on the sensor plane. Presenting
this framework with a dynamic system and a static scene allows us
to use a simple operator for source estimation, implemented here as
Wiener deconvolution on event-stream data. Previous research
using active neuromorphic vision with a tunable liquid lens for
point-source localization (Ralph et al., 2024) shows improved
sensitivity, noise rejection, and localization error, compared to
other EVS-based space imaging methods, but requires long
accumulation time. The ability to perform a similar task via direct
deconvolution from events presents an avenue for novel algorithms
for this task and for various other CNI applications.
2. Methods
2.1. Notation and pixel level derivative estimation
EVS's react to change in log-brightness by reporting either ON or
OFF events when the pixel reference voltage crosses predefined θON
or θOFF threshold values, respectively, and then reset the pixel
reference voltage after a pre-defined refractory period, trf. The pixel
voltage generally follows a logarithmic function of the impinging
photon flux intensity. An event ek ≡ (xk, tk, pk) represents such a
change at pixel xk = (xk, yk) at an instance tk, where pk = 1 or −1
for log-intensity increase by θON or decrease by θOFF respectively,
assuming no latency and no noise events. Figure 1a shows an
example log-intensity signal for a single pixel, with an overlay of
binary ON and OFF events where pixel voltage crosses said
threshold. Specifically, for small thresholds and limited bandwidth
signals, the relation between event k and the log-intensity
derivative can be approximated by Equation 1:
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Threshold crossing events for dynamic optical systems. (a) The
event-pixel typically reports the signal-threshold crossing of log-
intensity, with a fixed refractory-period delay. (b) These are used to
estimate the signal log-intensity derivative per event. A simple
linear interpolation estimate works well for consecutive, similarly
polarized events but fails for polarity-switching events. (c) A
dynamic linear systems description of an optical system, T,
projecting an input field U to an intensity map I. The product rule
describes the temporal derivative of these functions. Such a system
can dynamically model a point-source projection through an
elec