
Materials and methods
Patient characteristics
In this study, 4 patients with localized prostate cancer underwent
preoperative standard protocol diagnostics and staging and
underwent a transperitoneal(+ robot-assisted radical
prostatectomy, extended pelvic lymph node dissection) between
2023 and 2024. During surgery, an AP4000 mechanical tracking
recorder (Intuitive Surgical Inc.) was used. The retrospective
analysis of this data was approved by the local ethical committee
(study number IRBd23 − 309), and the need for informed consent
was waived.
Surgical procedure
Procedures were performed through a 6-port transperitoneal
approach using the 4-arm da Vinci Xi system (Intuitive Surgical
Inc.) by the same expert surgeon (HvdP). For all four procedures,
the zero-degrees endoscope video output was manually annotated
(HvdP, VO) to segment the timeline into ten distinct procedural
steps (Fig. 2): (1) Preparation (blue), (2) Adhesiolysis (orange), (3)
Lymph node dissection (green), (4) Retzius space dissection (red),
(5) Anterior bladder neck transection (purple), (6) Posterior bladder
neck transection; seminal vesicle (SV) and posterior dissection
(brown), (7) Lateral and apical dissection (pink), (8) Urethral
transection (gray), (9) Vesicourethral anastomosis (light green),
(10) Final inspection and specimen extraction (cyan) [22, 25].
Firefly fluorescence imaging of indocyanine green (ICG) was
applied during lymph node dissections (step 3) in 2 out of 4
procedures.
Fig.2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Variation in endoscope speed along color-coded RARP steps 1–10.
Schematic endoscopic images illustrate each step on the sample
procedure timeline, along with normalized speed of endoscope.
White gaps on timeline indicate periods unrelated to defined
surgical steps
Data preparation
Robotic arm movements in the x, y, and z (3D) dimensions were
recorded using the research-grade AP4000 recording device that
was attached to the surgical console to log the mechanical positions
of instruments. Because we used mechanical tracking, no manual
annotation was required.
Recordings were performed throughout the entire procedure at a
sampling rate of 120 Hz. The video output from one “eye” (2D) of
the endoscope was simultaneously captured at 30 Hz. To ensure
temporal alignment, the digitized trajectories of all four robotic
arms were synchronized with the endoscopic video stream. Each
robotic arm was subsequently assigned to its corresponding
instrument. Like our previous work [22], movement trajectories
were used to extract 6 kinematic metrics, namely: (1) speed, (2)
displacement, (3) distance to origin, (4) acceleration norm, (5)
curvature, and (6) smoothness. For the velocity-related metrics,
finite-difference formulas were applied to approximate derivatives
with higher precision: [image], displacement =[image], velocity
[image], acceleration [image], acceleration norm =[image]
curvature =[image], smoothness =[image], where pk = (xk, yk,
zk) and [image] is a local time step. Acceleration norm is further
referred to as “acceleration” in the manuscript.
Each data entry included a timestamp representing the elapsed time
since the start of the procedure, along with the corresponding 3D
spatial coordinates of the robotic arm, the firefly mode state (ON/
OFF), and the procedural steps as defined previously [22]. All data
processing was conducted in Python 3.11.11 using pandas 2.2.2 and
numpy 2.0.2.
Statistics
Descriptive statistics are presented as means or median values with
interquartile range. To quantify difference between surgical steps,
we computed the straight-line (Euclidean) distance ([image])
between the mean feature vectors of each step. Each vector
included standardized 3D coordinates (x, y, z) and metrics for
endoscope. Spearman’s rank correlation was used to assess
relationships between kinematic metrics. Visualization was
performed with matplotlib 3.10.0 and seaborn 0.13.2 libraries.
Mann-Whitney U test was used for group comparison. Statistical
tests were performed using scipy 1.16.1 library in Python 3.11.11.
A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Endoscope motion across surgical steps
Endoscope kinematics significantly differed between the surgical
steps. Mean endoscope curvature (8.4*108-2.6*109 vs.
3.3*108-5.1*109; r = 0.12), speed (2.6*10− 3-4.8*10− 3 vs.
3.4*10− 3-7.0*10− 3; r=-0.03), acceleration (2.9*10− 1-3.6*10− 1
vs. 3.2*10− 1-4.9*10− 1; r=-0.07) and displacement (2.8*10− 
5-4.5*10− 5 vs. 3.5*10− 5-6.3*10− 5; r=-0.03) were generally
lower (during the middle steps (steps 4–8 vs. steps 1–3, 5–10) of the
procedure (Fig. 3A). A trend that reflects the execution of more
precise surgical actions (i.e., Retzius, bladder neck, seminal vesicle,
lateral/apical, and urethral dissection). Toward the end of the
procedure (steps 5–9; e.g. bladder neck transection, seminal vesicle
and posterior dissection, lateral/apical dissection, urethral
transection, and vesicourethral anastomosis), distance to origin
decreased compared to the early steps (1–4) (Fig. 3A). Indicating
more deliberate and optimized endoscope movements. Overall
endoscope activity, defined as peaks in displacement, was highest
during steps 1, 2, 8, 9, and 10 (Preparation, Adhesiolysis, Urethral
transection, Vesicourethral anastomosis and Final inspection and
extraction, respectively; Fig. 3B). Steps that require exploratory
maneuvers and navigation of complex anatomies.
Fig. 3.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Endoscope movements through different steps of a sample
procedure. (A) Boxplots of various kinematic metrics per step; (B)
Pie chart of endoscope activity peaks (defined as peaks in
displacement) per step corrected for step duration; (C) Difference
between surgical steps calculated as Euclidean distance based on
normalized endoscope kinematics and positional data alone (higher
distance, marked by lighter color, corresponds to more different
kinematic signatures between steps)
The Euclidean distance shown in Fig. 3C represents the difference
between step-averaged kinematic vectors, computed across all
standardized features (speed, normalized acceleration,
displacement, smoothness, curvature, positional coordinates), and
therefore quantifies how distinct each step is from the others. In all
four procedures the distance of the Preparation and Adhesiolysis
(steps 1 and 2), as well as the Final inspection (step 10), were
markedly different from the rest of the procedure. In all cases the
distance observed in steps 5–9 was highly similar, consistent with
the trends observed in the mean kinematic measures (Fig. 3A&B).
