
Methods: The new perimetry method, termed gaze-contingent
flicker pupil perimetry, consists of the repetitive on, and off
flickering of a bright disk (2 hz; 320 cd/m2; 4° diameter) on a gray
background (160 cd/m2) for 4 seconds per stimulus location. The
disk evokes continuous pupil oscillations at the same rate as its
flicker frequency, and the oscillatory power of the pupil reflects
visual sensitivity. We monocularly presented the disk at a total of
80 locations in the central visual field (max. 15°). The location of
the flickering disk moved along with gaze to reduce confounds of
eye movements (gaze-contingent paradigm). The test lasted ~5 min
per eye and was performed on 7 patients with cerebral visual
impairment (CVI), 8 patients with primary open angle glaucoma
(age >45), and 14 healthy, age/gender-matched controls.
Results: For all patients, pupil oscillation power (FFT based
response amplitude to flicker) was significantly weaker when the
flickering disk was presented in the impaired as compared to the
intact visual field (CVI: 12%, AUC = 0.73; glaucoma: 9%, AUC =
0.63). Differences in power values between impaired and intact
visual fields of patients were larger than differences in power values
at corresponding locations in the visual fields of the healthy control
group (CVI: AUC = 0.95; glaucoma: AUC = 0.87). Pupil sensitivity
maps highlighted large field scotomas and indicated the type of
visual field defect (VFD) as initially diagnosed with standard
automated perimetry (SAP) fairly accurately in CVI patients but less
accurately in glaucoma patients.
Conclusions: We provide the first quantitative and objective
evidence of flicker pupil perimetry's potential in detecting CVI-and
glaucoma-induced VFDs. Gaze-contingent flicker pupil perimetry is
a useful form of objective perimetry and results suggest it can be
used to assess large VFDs with young CVI patients whom are unable
to perform SAP.
Keywords: pupillary response, perimetry, open-angle glaucoma,
cerebral visual impairment, pupillometry, neuro-ophthalmic
disease, visual field defect
Introduction
When patients report visual impairments and an ophthalmologist
suspects a visual field defect (VFD), a batch of tests will be
performed. One typical test for detecting VFD is perimetry, which
tests the patient's vision (i.e., visual sensitivity) across several
locations of the visual field. The mostly used, standard,
conventional form is threshold perimetry in which patients are
shown small light points for short durations at varying light
intensities and locations. Patients are asked to fixate centrally on a
display and respond whenever a point in the para-fovea or
periphery is seen. Point intensities and locations are adapted until
the lowest visibility threshold is found for each location in the
visual field.
Despite its common use, the subjective character of standard
automated perimetry (SAP; also refered to as standard conventional
perimetry; SCP) brings along several problems. The first problem is
that very young healthy children (<5 years) (1) and most of the
neurologically impaired children suffering from brain damage
cannot perform SAP, since these techniques require task
comprehension, full cooperation, and motoric responses (2). It is
estimated that only 4% of the patients that belong to the latter
group are able to perform SAP (2). Second, patients may rather
easily fake visual field loss (e.g., for financial or psychological
reasons) and forge SAP (3). Patients with simulated visual field loss
may be subjected to extensive, time-consuming procedures, and
costly medical investigations are performed until the factitiousness
of the symptoms are discovered (4). The third problem is that the
sensitivity and reliability of SAP can be distorted by eye-movements
and fixation losses. Accurate visual processing highly depends on
the focus of gaze (5, 6) and covert attention (7–10).
Pupil perimetry1, as an alternative method for sensory perimetry, is
suggested to circumvent the problems outlined above [for reviews,
see (11–13)]. Pupil perimetry consists of the measurement of the
amplitude or latency of the pupillary light reflex2 as a measure of
visual sensitivity in response to the onset of bright stimuli across
several locations in the visual field. Several pupil perimetry studies
propose that the visual sensitivity maps measured with pupil
perimetry are qualitatively comparable to visual sensitivity maps
from threshold perimetry [e.g., (14)]. One meta-analysis and
several recent publication on multifocal pupillographic perimetry
reported quantitative evidence for pupil perimetry's effectiveness in
detecting glaucoma (13, 15–18). Some additional evidence exists in
favor of the effectiveness of pupil perimetry in diagnosing patients
with damage to the optic tract, to or near the lateral geniculate
nucleus, or to the occipital lobes. So far, damage to the optic tract
does not seem to produce reliable alterations in the pupil light
reflex (11, 14, 19). Damage to or near the lateral geniculate nucleus
and to the optic chiasm results in weakened pupil responses when
stimuli are presented in the blind fields as compared to intact fields
(14, 20–23). Damage to the occipital lobe also leads to similar
effects on pupil responses to stimuli presented inside and outside
the blind fields of hemianopic patients (12, 14, 19, 21, 23–28).
Despite these promising results, pupil perimetry has not yet
progressed to a method that is commonly applied in
ophthalmology. Furthermore, the effectiveness of pupil perimetry
has not yet been quantitatively assessed in CVI.
One possible explanation for the low popularity of pupil perimetry
could be related to the way its diagnostic effectiveness has so far
been examined. For example, pupil perimetry results of patients
with post-geniculate damage are often reported in the form of
qualitative comparisons of visual sensitivity maps based on
subjective observations, rather than quantitative analyses of
sensitivities (14, 19, 21, 27, 28). Also, previous studies either did
not include healthy control populations for comparison or pupil
sensitivities of healthy populations could not be dissociated from
those of patients (14, 20–23, 28). Pupil perimetry has also been
denoted as an impractical method because of its complexity, time-
consuming nature, and poor spatial resolution (11). Lastly, when
comparing pupil perimetry to SAP, it is automatically assumed that
both measurement outcomes stem from the same underlying neural
circuitry. However, the mechanism that determines sensitivity in
pupil perimetry is not necessarily the same as the mechanism
underlying visual awareness of brightness in SAP. Pupil perimetry
may thus have the potential to complement SAP, independent of the
type of patient, in addition to being a replacement test for patients
that are unable to reliably report visual perception.
The current study examines the effectiveness of pupil perimetry
with a different approach than the studies described above. More
specifically, we will control for effects of eye movements by (i)
measuring where observers are fixating and (ii) adjusting the
position of the stimulus contingent with gaze [see Figure 1; also see
(29)]. Second, we ensure that patients have proficient endogenous
attention for the light stimuli to evoke reliable pupil responses by
superimposing a letter detection task on top of the target stimuli
(7). Third, we increase the amount of pupillary measurements
within a shorter time window with a novel approach: the
presentation of flickering stimuli at 2 Hz that captures both the
effects of response amplitude and variability in response latency in
a single pupil power measure from a frequency spectrum analysis.
Flicker stimuli reliably evoke phasic pupil responses (7),
predominantly driven by cone- and rod-pathway (30). Fourth, we
apply high resolution pupil perimetry at 80 locations with 4°
diameter stimuli. Lastly, differences in pupil response amplitudes
across visual field locations will be compared between patients with
damage to the occipital lobe (cerebral visual impairment, CVI) or to
the retina (primary open angle glaucoma; POAG) and age- and
gender-matched healthy controls. As will be shown later in this
paper, the novel approaches described above will lead to good to
moderate detection of absolute scotomas in CVI and glaucoma
patients, respectively.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Example of a single trial (A). Observers fixated a bull's eye at the
center of the screen while a flickering disk was presented in the
periphery at one of 80 locations (B) to evoke pupil oscillations. A
gaze-contingent stimulus presentation ensured that the retinal
location of the stimulus was fixed (e.g., see saccade). The observer's
task was to attend the stream of characters on top of the disk and
mentally count the number of appearances of the letter “X.” For
reasons of clarity, the scaling of the stimuli in the current figure
diverges from those used in the actual experiment.
Methods
Study design
We performed perimetry measurements on a healthy control group
with fully intact visual fields and a patient group with absolute
scotomas (i.e., partially damaged visual fields). The absolute
scotomas were either due to brain damage in the (extra-)striate
cortex or retinal damage caused by glaucoma. We performed both a
binary (i.e., visible or not) subjective perimetry and a continuous
(i.e., a spectrum of visibility) objective pupil perimetry. In the
subjective test, observers were asked to verbally report whether or
not they had seen a flickering stimulus. When the flickering
stimulus was not seen, this indicated that no flicker was visible at
all, suggesting that the location of an absolute (i.e., not a relative
scotoma) was stimulated. On the contrary to CVI patients, glaucoma
patients tend to have more relative scotomas when detected early,
because it is a progressive disease with worse visibility at start to
full blindness i