
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Modularization of Data Processing Tools
msCompare was designed to interconnect different modules of
independent open source LC-MS data analysis programs. We first
divided all programs into two main modules: feature detection/
quantification and feature alignment/matching. These two modules
were implemented by writing wrappers around the data processing
tools of OpenMS (version 1.2 and 1.5 for feature detection/
quantification and version 1.5 for alignment/matching) (37, 51–53)
and SuperHirn (version 0.05) (38), which execute the processing
steps of the program for either feature detection/quantification or
feature alignment/matching. MZmine (version 0.6) (36, 54, 55) can
be only accessed via a graphical user interface. For that reason we
implemented MZmine in msCompare by writing a program that
encapsulates MZmine as a Java library. Additionally, a wrapper was
written around our in-house feature alignment/matching tool based
on the Warp2D algorithm (27) and around a feature detection/
quantification module (N-M rules) that we implemented based on
the approach published by Radulovic et al. (48). Two XML-based
data formats were developed: one is the FeatureLists format, which
stores the feature detection/quantification results, and the other is
the FeatureMatrix format, which stores the resulting quantitative
matrix obtained after feature alignment/matching. The formats are
described in detail in the following section and were developed to
enable bidirectional conversion between the different internal data
formats of the various tools.
We have implemented additional modules to extend the
functionality of msCompare to perform filtering of the feature list
by setting criteria for feature properties (e.g. deleting features with
extreme width in the retention time and/or mass to charge ratio
dimensions), to export feature lists or feature matrices into a tab-
delimited or APML format, or to perform conversions between the
different feature list formats. The latter module has the additional
benefit of allowing the visualization of any feature list in the
TOPPView program (53), which is part of the OpenMS TOPP
framework, independently of the used feature detection/
quantification module. msCompare uses mzXML (56) as input
format, but mzData (57) and mzML (58) data formats are also
supported through the use of the file converter of OpenMS.
Data Integration
Our data format for the feature list is generic and allows storage of
the complete information of the feature lists provided by all
