
Experimental methodology
As illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), the experimental setup comprises an EVS
camera, a frame-based HS camera, a signal generator, a Light-
Emitting Diode (LED) driver, a high-power LED, and a quiescent
water tank that can be fitted with a particle chamber or an air
diffuser. The tested EVS camera is the PROPHESEE EVK4, featuring
a maximum resolution of 1280 × 720 pixels, a dynamic range
exceeding 120 dB, a low light cutoff of 0.08 lx, and a pixel latency
of less than 100 µs. This camera’s frame rate can surpass the
equivalent of 10,000 fps in conventional frame-based cameras. The
performance of the EVS camera is compared to the Photron APX-RS
HS camera (full sensor resolution: 1024 × 1024 pixels) through
synchronized experiments. Both cameras use identical 50 mm lenses
for minimal distortion, with the aperture set to f/11 to ensure
sufficient depth of field and image sharpness. Furthermore, small
aperture settings are required in EVS cameras to suppress random
events caused by ambient light, as they are highly sensitive to small
changes in light intensity.
Fig. 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
a Schematic diagram outlining the experimental configurations for
synchronized imaging of bubbly flow and particle release by EVS
and HS cameras. b The overlapping FOV region between the
cameras is used for the analysis
Image mapping between the EVS and the HS camera was achieved
by using a ruler image. We were able to place an event camera
adjacent to the HS camera without an angular offset, thanks to its
small size. However, as shown in Fig. 2 (b), the horizontal distance
covered by the two cameras differed. Thus, only the overlapped
area between the two cameras is considered during the analysis.
Restricting the analysis to the overlapped area, together with the
common-path refraction through the flat tank interface,
significantly reduces optical and geometric distortions in relative
measurements. It is worth noting that more accurate spatial
mapping could have been achieved using the calibration target
(checkerboard/dot pattern). However, this requires a transparent
(glass/acrylic) target plate with pulsed illumination to enable image
capturing by an event camera. To evaluate the effect of
magnification on measurement performance, experiments were
conducted at different spatial resolutions by varying the camera
distance from the particle release and bubble generation locations
and by using extension rings. The corresponding magnification
scales are described in later sections.
A function generator (TTi tgp110) is used to trigger the high-speed
camera, and the same signal is fed into the EVS data stream to
synchronize both cameras. This step is essential, since the EVS
camera acquires data in continuous mode, requiring a well-defined
external common trigger signal to synchronize the discrete frames
of the HS camera with the EVS camera output. The frame rate of
the HS camera was set to 1000 fps. Back illumination required for
shadow imaging is provided by an in-house developed high-power
LED system. In this study, the performance of the EVS camera is
evaluated under both continuous and pulsed illumination
conditions. For continuous illumination, the LED is directly
connected to the DC power supply, while pulsed illumination is
achieved through a MOSFET-based LED driver. The light pulsing
frequency was set to 1000 Hz (pulse width: 500 ns), synchronizing
with the HS camera frame rate. Both the light pulsing frequency
and pulse width have a significant influence on the EVS camera
performance, which will be explained in greater detail in the
relevant sections.
A transparent tank filled with water, measuring 10 × 10 × 10 cm, is
placed between the cameras and the LED. The bottom of the tank is
equipped with either a particle chamber or an air diffuser to
introduce particles or bubbles into the quiescent water. The particle
chamber slots have a diameter of 4 mm and are loaded with
Cospheric polypropylene polymer particles, which are naturally
buoyant in water and have a diameter of 2.483 mm ± 0.004 mm
and a density of 0.9 g/cc. The difference in slot size and the particle
size is intended to prevent the simultaneous release of multiple
particles and the jamming of the particles in the slots. After loading
the particles, the chamber slots are filled with water and inspected
to ensure that there are no bubbles in the slot that could block the
particle release or reside on them. Before filling the tank with
water, the particle chamber slots are closed with a gate that is
manually opened to facilitate the release of particles.
Bubbles were produced with a 0.3 mm air diffuser connected to an
adjustable air supply at the tank bottom. Experiments were
conducted with varying bubble diameters, generation rates (fb), and
