
Materials and methods
Computed tomography (CT) scans of 6 native cadaver legs were
used to design patient-specific guides. Bony landmarks and virtual
single-line collateral ligaments were identified to acquire real-time
intraoperative feedback on bone resection, implant alignment,
tibiofemoral kinematics, and collateral ligament elongations using
the Next-AR system. The specimens were subjected to squatting
(35°-100°) motion using a physiological ex vivo knee simulator
while maintaining a constant vertical ankle load of 110 N through
active quadriceps and bilateral hamstring controls. Subsequently,
each knee underwent a medially-stabilized TKA (Medacta) with
mechanical alignment technique and was retested under the same
conditions as in their native state. The tibiofemoral and
patellofemoral kinematics, along with collateral ligament strains,
were computed from 3D marker trajectories using a six-camera
optical system (Vicon). MCL and LCL insertions—ant, mid, and post
bundles—were identified in relation to bone-pin markers using a
wand.
Results
Both native and post-operative conditions exhibited similar tibial
valgus orientation (Root Mean Square Error (RMSE = 1.7°), patellar
flexion (RMSE = 1.2°), abduction (RMSE = 0.5°), and rotation
(RMSE = 0.4°) during squatting (p > 0.13). However, a significant
difference was observed in tibial internal rotation between 35° and
62° (p < 0.048, RMSE = 3.2°). MCL strains in anterior (RMSE = 
1.5%), middle (RMSE = 0.7%), and posterior (RMSE = 0.8%) were
closely matching in both conditions, showing no statistical
differences (p > 0.05). Contrary, LCL strain in all bundles (RMSE < 
4.6%) differed significantly from mid to deep flexion in both
conditions (p < 0.048).
Conclusion
The novel intraoperative Next-AR system not only targets planned
knee alignment but also aids in restoring native knee kinematics
and elongation of the collateral ligaments through real-time
feedback.
Keywords : Collateral ligament kinematics, Knee arthroplasty,
Navigation, Computer-assisted surgery
Introduction
Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a highly successful treatment for
end-stage knee osteoarthritis and aims to restore pre-operative
biomechanical- and kinematic properties mimicking the native knee
joint [1]. Despite the overall success of TKA, a notable proportion of
patients may remain dissatisfied post-surgery. Possible factors
contributing to joint pain, reduced motion or instability are implant
loosening, poor soft tissue balance, or implant choice [2].
Advancements have been made in various aspects of TKA
technologies to address dissatisfaction and alignment outliers,
advancements have been made in various aspects of TKA
technology. These include improvements in implant design and
materials, image-based cutting guides, patient-specific implants, and
computer-navigated surgery [3]. Navigation systems, whether
imageless or image-based (CT or MRI) assist in achieving desired
alignment goal, thus recreating optimal ligament tension and knee
kinematics [4]. Current literature has yet to provide definitive
evidence comparing image-based and imageless navigation systems
in terms of accuracy, patient-reported outcomes (PROMs), range of
motion (ROM), or postoperative satisfaction. However, differences
have been noted between planned and achieved bone cuts, with
femoral and tibial coronal cuts more likely to result in unintended
varus using imageless systems. This is likely because imageless
systems rely on intra-articular anatomical landmarks, making their
accurate identification critical for precise implantation [5].
There is ongoing debate about which type of implant design is
superior. Currently, the most popular designs are cruciate retaining
(CR) and posterior stabilized (PS) implants. Additionally, medially
stabilized implants have been introduced to mimic natural knee
kinematics, such as femoral rollback and ligament behavior, more
closely [6, 7].
Previous studies have shown that none of the ligament bundles of
MCL and LCL showed isometric behavior after TKA, regardless of
implant design. Achieving symmetrical medial and lateral joint
spaces in both extension and flexion intraoperatively does not
necessarily equate to optimal soft tissue balance [8, 9] Preservation
of ligament tension during knee motion is challenging in TKA and
new technologies are emerging to cope with these challenges.
Medacta International has recently introduced the Next-Ar
Navigation Platform (Medacta International, Strada Regina,
Switzerland), a wireless single use tracking system mounted directly
onto bone. This system provides real-time intraoperative feedback
by using preoperative CT to identify bony landmarks and
ligamentous insertions. Consequently, the surgeon can monitor
bone resection, knee alignment, tibiofemoral kinematics and
collateral ligament elongation. Precise adjustments can be made
during the procedure.
This study aims to assess the efficacy of a novel Next-AR system for
medially stabilized TKA in restoring native joint kinematics and
collateral ligament strains in a cadaveric set-up. In this study,
cadaveric knees were used for testing as they complement in vivo
research and represent the most physiologically representative
option for evaluatin knee joint function and collateral ligament
behavior under reproducible and standardized conditions.
Materials and methods
Preoperative specimen imaging and surgical planning
Seven fresh-frozen full cadaveric legs (age = 80.8 ± 9.59, three
unilateral female donors, one unilateral and two bilateral male
donors, height = 165 cm ± 0.5, and weight = 66 kg ± 10.5) were
obtained following ethical approval from the local Ethics
Committee (NH019-2021-04-01). The specimens were screened for
potential lower limb disorder and prior surgical intervention. No
significant deformities were present, coronal alignment was < 5°
for all specimens. Bicortical bone pins were fixed into the femur,
tibia, and patella to rigidly attach dedicated rigid marker frames,
each containing four reflective spheres. Each specimen’s computer
tomography (CT) scans (Siemens Somatom Force, Siemens
Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) were then acquired in full
extension with a slice thickness of 0.6 mm. Segmentation software
(Mimics 25.0, Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) was used based on the
well-established algorithm to identify the location of spherical
markers and the required anatomical landmarks from CT images
[10–12]. These identified landmarks were used to define bone-
specific anatomical joint coordinate systems (ACS). For the femur
and tibia, the joint coordinate systems were defined according to
the Grood and Suntay convention for the femur, tibia, and patella
[13]. For the patella, we used a Grood and Suntay–based extension
as described by Bull et al. The patellar anatomical coordinate
system was constructed by defining the z-axis (proximal–distal)
along the central cartilage ridge, defining the y-axis (mediolateral)
perpendicular to this ridge using the line between the most lateral
patellar edge and the central medial patellofemoral ligament
insertion, and obtaining the x-axis (anterior–posterior) as the cross-
product of the y- and z-axes. Patellofemoral kinematics were then
expressed relative to the femoral coordinate system using the
Grood–Suntay floating-axis convention. More specifically, flexion/
extension corresponds to rotation about the femoral mediolateral
axis, medial–lateral tilt corresponds to rotation about the patellar
long (z) axis, and abduction-adduction rotation corresponds to
rotation about the floating axis, defined as the cross product of the
patellar long axis (z-axis) and the femoral anterior–posterior (x)
axis. Translations of the patella were calculated along the femoral
axes as anterior–posterior, medial–lateral, and superior–inferior
translations [10].
Additional CT scans of the hip, knee, and ankle of each subject were
acquired conforming to the MyKnee protocol (Medacta
International SA, Castel San Pietro, Switzerland) to design patient-
specific surgical guides [14], including the proprietary holders for
the Next-AR motion trackers (a camera and a receiver unit), for
mechanical alignment technique and to generate input parameters,
such as 3D models of the bones, bony landmarks, and insertions of
the collateral ligaments [15–17]. Subsequently, these input
parameters were exported into the Next-AR Navigation Platform.
Specimen preparation
Each specimen was thawed 24 h before testing, with a single
freezing-thawing cycle. The femur and the tibia were resected 32
cm proximally and 28 cm distally to the knee joint line,
respectively. Care was taken to preserve the joint capsule, ligaments
and tendons while removing the skin and subcutaneous tissue
around the knee joint. The exposed quadriceps tendon was clamped
within a custom metal clamp, and suture loops (2 × 2 non-
absorbable polyester braided suture wire; Cardioxyl, Peters
Surgical, Bobigny Cedex, France) were passed through the medial
and lateral hamstring tendons. The tibia and femur were embedded
in metal containers using an acrylic resin (Struers, Ballerup,
Denmark) while positioning the femur in 6° of valgus.
Preoperative testing
The native specimens were mounted into an Oxford-based
physiological ex-vivo knee simulator and subjected to passive
flexion (10°–120°) and squatting (35°–100°), respectively. During
passive flexion, the femur pot was rigidly attached to the knee
simulator, with the tibia and the tendons left unconstrained.
Subsequently, the tibia was manually cycled from maximum
extension to maximum flexion angle.
For squatting motion, the tibial pot was mounted to the ankle
assembly. The suture loops fixed to the medial and collateral
hamstring tendons were connected to the medial and lateral
electromechanical hamstring actuators through a steel pulley and
cable system. The quadriceps clamp was affixed to the quadriceps
electromechanical actuators directly through a clevis and pin
assembly.
During