
Experimental spectra are scored against search space lipids with
similar precursor masses using a peak score based on the
hypergeometric distribution and an intensity score utilizing the
percentage of total ion intensity residing in matching peaks. The
LipidLama component filters the results via mixture modelling and
density estimation. We assess Greazy’s performance against the
NIST 2014 metabolomics library, observing high accuracy in a
search of multiple lipid classes. We compare Greazy/LipidLama
against the commercial lipid identification software LipidSearch and
show that the two platforms differ considerably in the sets of
identified spectra while showing good agreement on those spectra
identified by both. Lastly, we demonstrate the utility of Greazy/
LipidLama with different instruments. We searched data from
replicates of alveolar type 2 epithelial cells obtained with an
Orbitrap and from human serum replicates generated on a Q-TOF.
These findings substantiate the application of proteomics derived
methods to the identification of lipids. The software is available
from the ProteoWizard repository: [http://tiny.cc/bumbershoot-
vc12-bin64].
TOC image
[image]
Introduction
The diversity of cellular functions and diseases in which lipids play
a role substantiates their importance and the necessity of their
study1–7. A complete understanding of these roles requires a
comprehensive accounting of the lipidome, but this has proven an
elusive goal. The study of complex lipid mixtures can be done with
the help of rapidly scanning tandem mass spectrometers, producing
overwhelming amounts of data that, in turn, require sophisticated
software for interpretation. Proteomics has benefitted from well-
developed software for years but the development of similar
software for lipidomic analysis has been relatively slow.
Current lipidomics tools often cater to specific applications. Some
are designed for direct infusion lipidomics where the sample is
subjected to electrospray without prior chromatographic
separation8. AMDMS-SL9 and LipidView10 use this technique along
with precursor ion and neutral loss scanning to search for ions that
are characteristic of a head group or fatty acyl substituent. Tools
such as LipidQA11, LipidExplorer12, and LipidInspector13 are
designed for direct infusion experiments but with data-dependent
acquisition scanning. The alternative to direct infusion is liquid
chromatography, a method shared with shotgun proteomics. LC/MS
can be used to identify a list of possible lipid identifications, often
isomers from the same lipid class. Lipid specific software such as
Lipid Data Analyzer14 as well as general metabolomics software like
MZmine215 are designed for this type of analysis. LC-MS/MS allows
for isomeric species to be distinguished through the fragments they
produce. The commercial software LipidSearch16 can analyze such
data.
Although lipidomics software has advanced in recent years, several
challenges bar the path to routine interpretation of these data sets.
In proteomics, peptide sequences are routinely identified from MS/
MS spectra through database search algorithms that employ simple
rules for predicting peptide fragmentation patterns. Lipids exhibit
greater structural diversity than peptides. The LIPID MAPS database
categorizes more than 37000 lipids into eight lipid categories that
are further divided into dozens of subclasses, each of which ionizes
and fragments in a distinct manner17. As a result, predicting the
appearance of MS/MS spectra for lipids requires greater attention
than in proteomics, and the number of fragments seen for a given
compound is generally smaller. Publically available MS/MS spectral
libraries for lipids are also far less populated and diverse than those
in proteomics, although there has been some recent work in this
area with the development of LipidBlast18, a collection of predicted
MS/MS spectra for many lipid classes. The literature detailing the
MS/MS mechanisms for lipids is considerably less fully developed
than it is for proteomics. In proteomics, extensive spectral libraries
and sequence databases have yielded powerful statistical scoring
algorithms and methods for estimating false discovery rates.
Leveraging methods developed for proteomics to lipidomics may
begin to address the shortage of tools in this space.
We have developed the software “Greazy” for the high-throughput
identification of phospholipid MS/MS data. Greazy employs a
number of techniques borrowed from proteomics that have the
potential to address many of the challenges that arise in lipidomics.
Greazy incorporates Proteowizard19, enabling it to accept many
vendor-specific and open file formats in use today. A set of user
defined parameters define a phospholipid search space and a
comprehensive literature-derived fragmentation model for each
lipid in that space. These predicted spectra are compared to
experimental ones through two probability-based scores. Lastly, a
mixture modeling approach using density estimation is used to
calculate the false discovery rate and to generate a cutoff score.
Successful matches are written to the easily reviewed mzTab file
format20.
Experimental Section
Data Sets
NIST Tandem MS Library
The 2014 release of the NIST small molecule MS/MS library
consists of 193,119 spectra for a number of different compound
types including metabolites, drugs, phospholipids, and more. The
spectra for these compounds were acquired under a broad range of
experimental conditions. Ion trap and collision cell instrument types
were used; data were acquired in both positive and negative ion
mode. A number of precursor adducts were used, along with a wide
range of collision energies, resulting in differing degrees of
fragmentation. This data set was split into two files based on the
polarity of each entry resulting in a positive ion file containing
161,355 entries and a negative ion file containing 31,764. Next,
phospholipids were extracted from these files using a string search.
Those entries containing the strings “glycero-3-phos,” “sphingosyl,”
or “sphingenyl” were kept and the rest discarded. This reduced the
positive ion file to 3,107 entries and the negative ion file to 1,232.
Represented in these entries were 141 distinct compounds in the
positive ion file and 175 in the negative. The total number of
distinct compounds was 214. The resulting files were reformatted as
MGF files for use with Greazy.
Bone Marrow Stem Cells
In the Department of Biochemistry at the University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio lipids were extracted from cultured
bone marrow stem cells collected from wild-type mice. The lipid
extracts were subjected to reversed-phase liquid chromatography
coupled to a Thermo Fisher Q Exactive tandem mass spectrometer.
Analysis was done in both positive and negative ion modes resulting
in 13362 and 12438 MS/MS spectra respectively. Lipid
identifications were made with LipidSearch software version 4.0.14
(Thermo Scientific) and provided to us for comparison purposes.
The raw files were converted to mzML files using Proteowizard’s
MSconvertGUI tool for analysis with Greazy and LipidLama.
Alveolar Type 2 Epithelial Cells
At the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory lipids were extracted
from sorted Type 2 epithelial cells obtained via magnetic bead
sorting from lung tissue harvested from post-natal day 7 and post-
natal day 28 C57BL/6 mice. Lungs from five post-natal day-7 and
five post-natal day-28 mice were each pooled, sorted and
partitioned into replicates. The replicates were each subjected to
lipid extraction using chloroform/methanol (2:1, v/v), and the
extracts were analyzed by ultra-performance reversed-phase liquid
chromatography coupled to a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos
mass spectrometer. The extracts were analyzed in both positive and
negative ion mode.
Human Serum
At the Mycobacteria Research Laboratories within the Department
of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology at Colorado State
University - Fort Collins lipids were extracted from platelet poor
human plasma (Sigma-Aldrich) derived serum using chloroform/
methanol (2:1, v/v). The extract was analyzed by high-performance
reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to an Agilent Q-TOF
mass spectrometer. Ten technical replicates were produced with
selection of 4 precursors per cycle, five at low collision energy (
3∗(m/z)/100+2) and five at high collision energy ( 5∗(m/
z)/100+2). All data was acquired in negative ion mode using
Agilent’s MassHunter software. These data sets can be found at the
MassIVE repository (ID: MSV000079377).
Software
Greazy is software for the high-throughput identification of
phospholipids from MS/MS spectra. Proteowizard19 is integrated
into the software, enabling Greazy to handle a number of open and
vendor specific file formats. The experimental and search space
parameters are input through a graphical user interface (Figure S1)
and are used to build a list of phospholipid precursor ions that are
then fragmented in silico for comparison to the experimental
spectra. The software generates theoretical spectra for lipid classes
from the glycerophospholipid and sphingolipid categories, each of
which has its own structure and requires a distinct model when
building the search space. Cardiolipins (CL), a member of the
glycerophospholipids, require additional attention and are
considered a separate category here. Details of the search space can
be found in Supporting Text S1.
Experimental Parameters and Precursors
Following the construction of the lipid search space, predicted
precursor ions are generated for each included lipid based on the
detection polarity (positive or negative) and the adducts expected
to be present. For positive ion mode, available adducts include
sodium, potassium, lithium, and ammonium; chloride, acetate, and
formate are included for negative ion mode. Sodium, potassium,
and lithium adducted cardiolipin precursors are also predicted i