
Materials and Methods
Code modifications
We modified the existing OpenMS C++ API to include a set of
functions which allow efficient processing of large XML
datastructures with minimal memory expenditure. Specifically, we
added the IndexedMzMLFileLoader class to the API which
allows loading of an indexed mzML file and returns an object of
type OnDiscMSExperiment to the client. This provides random
read access (“lazy loading”) to any spectrum or chromatogram
present in the indexed mzML file by loading only the currently
requested data structure into memory. In addition, we added the
CachedmzML class to the API which is able to read a cached mzML
file from disk. For event-driven data processing, we implemented
transform functions (inspired by the std::transform concept
in the C++ standard template library) for the MzMLHandler and
the MzXMLHandler objects which apply a requested transformation
to a given file on disk without ever fully loading the file into
memory. The user can provide the transformation operation
through a class derived from Interfaces::IMSDataConsumer
(or in Python, a class that implements all four required functions,
see online documentation and S1 Text).
Several implementations of the Interfaces::IMSDataConsumer
are provided and implement basic functions such as writing to the
mzML format, writing to a cached mzML format, applying a given
function pointer to all data, chaining consumers together to perform
multiple operations in a pre-defined order or simply perform no
operation (to be used at a place where a
Interfaces::IMSDataConsumer object is expected but no
operation is desired).
Code analysis
By dynamic analysis of the XML-parsing code of OpenMS using the
“callgrind” profiling tool, we were able to identify critical
performance bottlenecks. Specifically, we identified performance
issues during conversion of Base64 encoded data strings (as found
in the mzML and mzXML data formats) to floating point values as
well as during the construction of MSSpectrum instances. We were
able to improve the performance through optimized Base64 parsing
and through parallelization of the critical code sections, achieving
an overall performance boost of a factor of 4 or more compared to
the default OpenMS 1.11 code.
Performance measurement
All measurements of speed and system memory were performed on
the same Red Hat Enterprise Linux server using a custom built
version of OpenMS which incorporated all the described patches
and reporting code for speed and memory requirements. A small
sample application, TICCalculator, was written to compare the
speed and memory requirements of the different algorithms
described in the text. To evaluate single-threaded parsing, the -
threads command line parameter was set to 1 while it was set to
16 for the multi-threaded comparisons. To measure the parsing
speed of the ProteoWizard library, a sample program was built
against the ProteoWizard software library (revision 7261,
committed 2015-03-06); all related code can be found at https://
github.com/hroest/pwiz_readspeed. Resident size was used for all
memory measurements. All measurements were performed three
times (after two burn-in runs) and averages are reported. As a test
file, a single file from Röst et al. [14] was chosen and test files of
different sizes were generated using the OpenMS FileFilter
utility by selecting a retention time range of 100, 250, 500 and 750
seconds from the original input file, starting 2000 seconds into the
original file. The comparison of all algorithms was only performed
on the small, filtered files since the memory inefficient algorithms
could not handle the full file (60 GB size). We decided against
reporting CPU time and in favor of walltime since walltime is closer
to the user-experienced wait time which is relevant here. The
source code for the TICCalculator sample application can be
downloaded from https://github.com/hroest/OpenMS/tree/feature/
measureMemoryConsumption. All comparisons shown in the main
text refer to the C++ API, see S1 Text for performance benchmarks
of the Python API.
Availability
All described is currently available through https://github.com/
OpenMS/OpenMS and has been merged into the main OpenMS
development branch. Documentation for the different file access
modes by read and write use-case are provided through the
OpenMS documentation including three fully functional and nightly
tested sample programs (see documentation at http://ftp.mi.fu-
berlin.de/OpenMS/documentation/html/tutorial_format.html).
Results
Here we present a fast and versatile C++ and Python library for
reading and writing XML data formats used in MS-based proteomics
which is based on the OpenMS framework. The library provides raw
data access for different usage scenarios by allowing users to select
from several access modes tailored for a specific use-case (see Table
1). One access mode is optimized for sequential data processing
(“event-driven”), one for frequent random access (“cache”), one for
infrequent random access (“indexed”), while the original
implementation suited for small-scale data (“in-memory”) is also
still available. Specifically, the new features described here and
implemented in OpenMS include:
Table 1. Available access types of raw mass
spectrometric data through OpenMS.
This paper describes the implementation and use of the “random
access on disk” (indexed mzML and cached mzML) and the “event-
driven” access types and compares it to the previously available
“random access in memory” method.
Access Type
Use case
Random Access in
Memory
Read Fast access to small XML
datastructures
Write Fast storage of small XML
datastructures
Random Access on
Disc (indexed)
Read Access for infrequent random access
Write Only sequential writing possible (see
below)
Random Access on
Disc (cached)
Read Ultra-fast access for frequent random
access
Write Only sequential writing possible (see
below)
Event-driven
processing
Read Sequential read access suitable for
compressed or non-indexed files
Write Sequential write interface for mzML,
indexed mzML, cached mzML
Open in a new tab
