
Methods based on machine learning often begin with image
processing techniques to enhance images and extract relevant
features. Common techniques include image segmentation, edge
detection, and color space transformations. These preprocessing
steps help in detecting and isolating the infected regions and
extracting discriminative features for subsequent analysis. In such
methods, different properties of plant diseases and pests are used.
However, fine-tuning the system, including adjusting the light
source and shooting angle to achieve uniform illumination, is
essential-though it can be a challenging task38. Image processing-
based methods detect and classify the infected parts of the leaves by
applying pre-processing techniques followed by clustering and
segmentation of the leaves. The features including three key types,
namely, color, shape, and texture are extracted to feed the possible
augmented classifier. Several traditional machine learning
algorithms have been applied to infection detection on plant leaves.
These include decision trees, support vector machines (SVM), k-
nearest neighbors (KNN), and random forests. These algorithms can
effectively classify infected and healthy leaf regions based on
extracted features. The proposed work in21 presents a survey
reviewing the literature associated with plant disease detection
based on machine learning. According to this work, the methods
detect and classify the diseases with regard to the extracted feature
types and the utilized machine learning model. For example in39,
an HSI color conversion followed by color slicing technique is used
to extract regions of interest achieving an accuracy of 0.96621,39.
Alternatively, other color features including YCbCr, HIS and CIELAB
can be used to recognize disease spots40. The work presented in41
utilized image color analysis and k-means clustering technique to
detect and identify some special rice disease spots and leaves. The
authors of42 have engaged the naive statistics of a wide variety of
color image features augmented by traditional classifiers like SVM,
KNN, and RF to achieve an accuracy of about 0.9465. Alternative
works using color features for disease area segmentation can be
named as41,43–45. As another example, color, shape and texture
features including geometrical and texture indicators like area,
perimeter, contrast, entropy, etc., have been extracted from the
color features of the image in46. The feature set has been
augmented by an SVM classifier achieving the accuracy about
0.972. In the work presented in47, three rice leaf diseases have been
recognized using a combination of all features including color,
shape, and texture types. The SVM classifier has been applied on
the image wherein some initial background removals were applied
to achieve the accuracy of about 0.8857. Other works combining
the features can be mentioned as21,48–50. All of these methods and
similar ones may struggle with complex and high-dimensional
feature spaces and may not generalize well to unseen data. Also, it
might be very difficult, even unrealistic to expect the classical
image processing algorithms to completely eliminate the impact of
background and/or scene change on the detection and recognition
results38. There is a lot of instability when collecting plant disease
and pest images shed by the natural light35. The aforementioned
concerns as well as the incapability of classical and traditional
image processing methods in effective feature extraction motivate
