
Methods
Cherenkov images from multiple geometrically calibrated cameras
were projected onto Computed Tomography (CT) surface datasets to
provide a Cherenkov surface image map on the patient. A
raycasting algorithm was utilized to virtually map the Cherenkov
surface image into the beam's eye view. To test the ability to
quantitatively measure beam versus patient surface deviations from
the virtual beam's eye view, a series of 10 × 10 cm2 6X fields with
simulated spatial shifts were delivered to both flat and
anthropomorphic phantoms. Virtual beam's eye view images were
generated for each shift, and the magnitudes of Cherenkov map
shifts were measured with Iterative Closest Point (ICP) and
Hausdorff distance metrics with respect to a reference field.
Results
Iterative Closest Point algorithms achieved an average x and y
accuracy of 0.5 ± 0.2 mm and 0.3 ± 0.2 mm for the flat phantom
and 0.5 mm ± 0.7 mm and 0.3 mm ± 0.2 mm for the
anthropomorphic torso phantom. Camera projection error adds up
to an additional 0.9 mm of error.
Conclusion
Multi‐view surface mapping of Cherenkov images onto the patient
surface mesh enabled quantitative assessment of beam versus
topology shifts between fractions, using the Cherenkov emission
outline as a beam extent surrogate. We demonstrated the utility and
metrics of Cherenkov 3D mapping towards future applications
utilizing daily or real‐time surfaces obtained from, for example,
cone‐beam CT or surface‐guided radiotherapy (SGRT) systems.
Keywords: 3D surface mapping, optical quantitative imaging,
photon EBRT
1. INTRODUCTION
Cherenkov imaging enables real‐time visualization of beam delivery
during external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). 1 When
megavoltage (MV) radiation passes through tissue, secondary
electrons exceeding the phase velocity of light generate broadband
optical Cherenkov emission, which can be detected by time‐gated
intensified cameras. Imaging this emission during treatment reveals
the spatial and temporal pattern of each beam as it is delivered.
Cumulative images from each fraction can be compared with the
planned fluence to detect delivery deviations, enabling correction in
subsequent fractions.
Clinical studies in a retrospective cohort of 622 patients 2
demonstrated that Cherenkov imaging detected otherwise
unrecognized, clinically significant incidents in approximately 1.4%
of fractions. The technique complements surface guided
radiotherapy (SGRT) by adding direct visualization of the radiation
field, whereas SGRT alone provides only positional data in patient
coordinates. 3 However, current Cherenkov imaging produces a
fixed camera‐space view, limiting geometric interpretation. 4
Most Cherenkov imaging systems use two oblique camera views,
with an optional couch‐foot view, displayed as pseudo‐color
Cherenkov emission overlays on grayscale anatomy. These allow
visual detection of deviations such as unplanned anatomy in the
beam 2 or bolus misplacement, 5 but remain spatially qualitative
due to the oblique acquisition geometry and the lack of surface
geometry reference. Quantitative spatial analysis requires mapping
Cherenkov images into patient coordinates, which can be achieved
by projecting them onto 3D patient surface meshes. Here, we
combine multi‐view Cherenkov imaging data with surface meshes
to create the first 3D Cherenkov emission maps, enabling
visualization from arbitrary perspectives, including a virtual beam's‐
eye view (BEV) showing the delivered field shape on the patient.
This work develops and tests the utility of 3D Cherenkov surface
mapping to:
1. Merge multiple Cherenkov imaging viewpoints to avoid
incomplete Cherenkov visualization due to gantry and tissue
obstructions;
2. Evaluate displacement metrics to measure the Cherenkov
surface map deviations compared to Day 1 treatments;
3. Determine the limits of spatial accuracy of combined spatial
Cherenkov image mapping.
Here static CT surfaces were used as the source of patient surface
meshes and as the first step towards mapping that utilizes real‐time
SGRT maps. A raycasting algorithm 6 was developed to project
Cherenkov images from known camera positions onto static CT
surface meshes. Textured patient surface meshes were then used to
generate parallel and point projections of the Cherenkov emission
from beam's eye views for quantitative spatial analysis. Point
projection images were used to show users the beam shape on the
patient surface, while parallel projection images were used to
measure beam deviations.
In this work, Cherenkov camera calibration accuracy was first
assessed, then the raycasting accuracy was evaluated on a flat
phantom. Next, the surface map coverage was improved by
combining two Cherenkov images on an anthropomorphic phantom.
Finally, the Iterative Closest Point 7 , 8 (ICP) and Hausdorff 7 , 9
metrics were quantified on virtual beam's eye view parallel
projection images to quantitatively detect and measure beam shifts
on the patient surface.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. Experimental setup
Measurements were taken on two different linear accelerators
(Varian Trilogy and TrueBeam, Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto,
CA) in two different therapy vaults at the Dartmouth Cancer Center.
6 MV beams were delivered at a dose rate of 600 monitor units per
minute and a source to surface distance (SSD) of 100 cm to simulate
clinical whole breast radiotherapy conditions. Each measurement
used between 100 and 300 MU to maximize signal in each image
set. Standard field sizes of 10 × 10 cm2 were delivered to each
phantom (see Figure 1).
FIGURE 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
[Phantoms used for Cherenkov surface imaging] Anatomical Annie
Phantom (Left) and ABS Phantom (Right) with 10 × 10 cm2 fields
delivered.
Images were taken with two sets of clinical Cherenkov cameras
(BeamSite, DoseOptics, Lebanon, NH) mounted inside each of the
two treatment vaults. Both sets of Cherenkov cameras use fixed
focal length lenses (50 mm f/1.2). Imaging systems were calibrated
using factory isocenter calibration and positional calibration,
providing camera position coordinates, focal direction vectors, view
up vectors, and view angles.
A flat ABS plastic slab (40 cm × 40 cm × 1 cm, DoseOptics)
phantom and a tissue‐mimicking anthropomorphic silicone
phantom 10 were used as delivery targets. Both phantoms were set
up at the isocenter in the same position as their respective CT scans.
The flat phantom was set up with its center at the isocenter (100 cm
SSD) and used for virtual beam's eye view imaging, as its planar
shape allowed for easy validation of projection models. The
anthropomorphic phantom served to simulate a typical clinical case
with more complex geometry than the flat phantom. This phantom
was set up at isocenter with respect to positional radio‐opaque
markers with an isocenter inside the phantom (97 cm SSD). A
computer tomography (CT) scan was taken with 0.6 mm/slice
resolution, and a stereolithographic STL surface mesh file was
extracted from DICOM datasets with simple thresholding.
2.2. Algorithm for surface mapping
To integrate Cherenkov imaging with the patient's 3D geometry, the
recorded camera images must be accurately mapped onto the
patient surface mesh. This was accomplished using a raycasting
approach, in which each pixel in the Cherenkov image is traced
along a ray from the camera toward the 3D model. When a ray
intersects the patient surface, the corresponding Cherenkov
intensity value is assigned to that point on the mesh. Applying this
process to all pixels generates a surface texture that represents the
spatial distribution of Cherenkov emission on the patient. Once
textured, the surface mesh can be virtually re‐rendered from any
viewpoint, including a beam's‐eye view from the treatment source
position (See Figure 2).
FIGURE 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
[Raycasting overview] Transformation of multiple side view
Cherenkov images fused to create one virtual beam's eye view
image.
The raycasting process required three essential data structures: (1)
Cherenkov images, (2) Cherenkov camera spatial calibration data,
and (3) patient surface data.
1. Patient (phantom) surface data were acquired using a
Siemens SOMATOM CT scanner. This data were exported
from the Eclipse treatment planning software in Aria using
the DICOM export media filter. Body contours were converted
to STL format using 3D Slicer.
2. Cherenkov camera positioning data were acquired using
BeamSite calibration protocols and is stored as a text file
alongside Cherenkov images after each image acquisition. The
following essential data about the camera position is included
in the extrinsic calibration file: Camera position in mm (x1,
y1, z1), focal position in arbitrary units (x2, y2, z2), view up
vector in arbitrary units (x3, y3, z3), and the view angle in
degrees.
3. Cherenkov images were acquired using BeamSite software.
Images were captured at a framerate of 17 fps, internally
darkfield‐corrected and background‐subtracted, and
cumulative images were produced at a resolution of
1920 × 1200 pixels with 32‐bit depth. These images were
captured as raw 32‐bit frames and converted to png format
using ImageJ.
The following set of equations describes the steps to transform the
original image matrix Imgi into the beam's eye view projection
ImgBEV (all bolded variables are matrices/vector). For a visual
guide to each variable, see Figure 3. First, to ensure proper
texturing resolution at the isocenter approximately 1.4 m from the
camera, the Cherenkov images were up‐sampled by a factor of 3 to
generate an effective resolution of 5760 × 3600. To generate the
rays to be cast from the image onto the patient surface mesh
Surfmesh, the essential parameters are the camera position (treated
as a point source) Cpos, the camera focal position vector Fpos, the
view up vector that describes the correct image orientation Vup, and
the view angle that describes the angular field of view ϴv. To
transform the original two‐dimensional image in the