
Materials and methods
Ethics statements
All mice were maintained under standard housing conditions at the
MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) animal facilities, and all
animal procedures were reviewed and approved by the MDACC
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
All mice had free access to sufficient food and clean water and were
visited daily to assess the availability of food and water and the
growth of the tumor. A maximum of 5 mice were housed per cage,
and the veterinarians at the animal facility examined the mice for
infection and fighting injuries after surgery. Tumor-bearing mice
were euthanized at or before the humane endpoint stage in a CO2
chamber. The veterinarians at the animal facility assessed the mice
for humane endpoints, which included walking pain, shivering, a
loss of appetite or ascites. All KIC, KPIC, and 9 orthotopic mice
reached the humane endpoints, and all other mice were sacrificed
before the humane endpoints. LSL-KrasG12D; Ink4flox/+mice were
provided by Ronald Dephino, and all other mice were purchased
from The Jackson Laboratory (Maine. USA).
Freshly surged tissue samples and paraffin sections of human PC
were collected from the Pancreatic Surgery Unit of Zhongshan
Hospital Affiliated to Fudan University. All the procedures were
approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Zhongshan Hospital
of Fudan University.
Strains and breeding strategies for LSL-KrasG12D; LSL-
Trp53R172H/+; Ink4flox/+; Ptf1/p48-Cre (KPIC) mice
The mouse strains for breeding KPIC and KIC mice in this work
were included the following alleles: LSL-KRASG12D mice [18], LSL-
Trp53R172H/+ [19], Ink4aflox/+[20] and Ptf1/p48-Cre mice [21]. To
breed LSL-KrasG12D; LSL-Trp53R172H/+; Ink4flox/+; Ptf1/p48-Cre
(KPIC) mice, we crossed LSL-KrasG12D; LSL-Trp53R172H/+ (KP)
mice with Ink4flox/flox; Ptf1/p48-Cre (IC) mice. Alternatively, we
crossed LSL-KrasG12D; LSL-Trp53R172H/+; Ink4flox/+ (KPI) mice with
Ink4flox/flox; Ptf1/p48-Cr (IC) mice. Moreover, to obtain KIC mice,
we crossed Ink4flox/flox; Ptf1/p48-Cr (IC) mice with LSL-KrasG12D;
Ink4flox/flox(KI) mice. We obtained 5 KPIC mice from the first
breeding cages and 2 KPIC mice from second cages, and 8-10-week-
old immunocompetent C57BL/6 (male) mice were used for
orthotopic transplantation or intravenous injections. We used
standard genotyping primers provided by The Jackson Laboratory
(Maine. USA).
Perfusion of tumor with Lectin-Alexa 633 and 2-
NBDG-Alexa 488
Lectin-Alexa 633 and 2-NBDG Alexa 488 were dissolved in 0.01 mM
Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS). KPIC mice were deeply
anesthetized with isofluorane, and the Lectin-Alexa 633 (0.5 mg/
mL) and 2-NBDG-Alexa 488 (0.5 mg/mL) mixture was slowly
injected into the left ventricle of the heart with a TB syringe. Ten
minutes after injection, the KPIC mice were sacrificed by cervical
spine dislocation, and the tissues were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) for microscopy analyses.
Immunofluorescent staining and
immunohistochemistry
Fresh tumor samples were fixed in freshly prepared 4% PFA
overnight and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose/PBS solution. Thick
sections and cell immunofluorescent staining were stained and
scanned as previously described [22]. The Z-stack scanned images
were 3D reconstructed by the Zen 2009 software using a maximum
intensity projection.
Tissues were fixed using freshly prepared 4% PFA, and paraffin
sections were prepared following routine histology procedures.
Briefly, the sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated
in a decreasing ethanol gradient. Endogenous peroxidase activity
was blocked by 3% H2O2 for 10 minutes at room temperature.
Heat-mediated antigen retrieval was performed by placing the slides
in a sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0) and heating them twice in a
microwave. Next, the sections were blocked in protein blocking
agent (DAKO, USA) at 37℃ for 30 minutes. The sections were then
incubated with primary antibodies at 4℃ overnight, washed in PBS,
incubated with corresponding HRP-labeled secondary antibodies for
30 minutes, and again washed in PBS. Immunostaining was
achieved using 3,3’-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB/
H2O2). All tissue sections were counterstained with Hematoxylin.
The following antibodies were used in immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescent staining: Sox-9 (rabbit polyclonal antibody;
Abcam), p53 (rabbit polyclonal antibody; Santa Cruz), Phospho-
p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204) (rabbit polyclonal
antibody; Cell signaling), CD34 (rabbit polyclonal antibody;
Abcam), Her2/Erb (rabbit polyclonal antibody; Gene Tech), Ki67
(rabbit polyclonal antibody; Abcam), pAkt (ser 473) (rabbit
polyclonal antibody; Abcam), E-cadherin (mouse monoclonal
antibody; Abcam), pan-Cytokeratin (rabbit polyclonal antibody;
Abcam), Vimentin (goat; Sigma), anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488
conjugated immunoglobulin G (donkey; Life Technologies), anti-
mouse Alexa Fluor 555 conjugated immunoglobulin G (donkey; Life
Technologies), anti-goat Alexa Fluor 647 conjugated
immunoglobulin G (donkey; Life Technologies), and DAPI (Sigma).
Isolation of KPIC cells from spontaneous KPIC tumors
After euthanizing KPIC tumor-bearing mice in a CO2 chamber at the
humane endpoints, tumor tissues were removed and washed with
sterilized PBS to remove blood clots and then transferred to cell
culture dishes containing cell culture medium (DMEM + 10%
bovine serum + 2% antibiotics). The tissues were sectioned into
small pieces with a scalpel and plated in 10-cm dishes with limited
media to ensure tissue attachment. After a sufficient number of cells
had extravasated the tissues, the cells were digested and passaged.
We observed that early-passage cells consisted of two cell types:
After the 3rd passage, we obtained a cell line with epithelial
characteristics. After 30 passages, the cell morphology and growth
were stable.
Chemotherapeutic drug treatment of cells
We treated KPIC and KPC cells with gemcitabine and Abraxane in
vitro. Gemcitabine was dissolved in sterilized PBS to 100mg/mL,
and Abraxane was suspended in Sodium Chloride Injection to
100mg/mL. Briefly, 10×104 cells were plated in each well of a 24-
well plate containing coverslips and allowed to incubate overnight
before being treated with different doses of chemotherapeutic drugs
(5 nm/mL-80 nm/mL). After 36 hours, the coverslips were fixed
with 4% PFA for immunostaining.
Testing the tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of
KPIC cells
Male C57BL/6 mice aged 2–3 months were deeply anesthetized
with isoflurane, and KPIC cells (passage 3 and 6) suspended in
sterilized PBS buffer were then injected into the pancreas using an
insulin syringe, as previously described [23]. The pancreas of each
mouse (n = 9) was injected 0.5 million cells. Moreover, KPIC cells
were slowly injected orbital veins after deeply anesthetizing the
mice with isoflurane; each mouse was injected 0.1 ml PBS
containing 0.2 million cells. After surgery, the mice were placed on
a warming pad until waking and returned to the cage after they
began to walk freely. All mice had free access to food and water
after surgery and were examined daily by veterinarians for infection
and bleeding. All mice were sacrificed at or before the human
endpoint stage in a CO2 chamber.
Statistical Analysis
The data were statistically analyzed in GraphPad Prism 5 or SPSS
20. Differences between two groups were analyzed with Student’s t-
test, and overall survival was estimated with the Kaplan-Meier
method. All data are presented as the mean ± s.e.m unless
otherwise specified.
Results
KPIC mice developed local aggressive pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma that resulted in a median
survival of 3 months
We palpated KPIC mice each week starting at 4 weeks to detect
tumors. All KPIC mice exhibited palpable hard masses at
approximately 7 weeks, and ultrasound scanning confirmed the
existence of a hard mass. The tumors of KPIC mice grew quickly
thereafter, and KPIC animals developed cachexia, abdominal
distension and jaundice at approximately 12 weeks; these
characteristics are similar to clinical findings observed in human
patients with PC. A gross pathological examination of the anatomy
indicated that spontaneous KPIC mice developed locally invasive
tumors that infiltrated the spleen, intestine and kidney (Fig 1A).
Consistent with clinical syndromes, the swelling of the small bowel,
the distension of the gallbladder and hemorrhagic ascites were
observed in the abdominal cavities of KPIC mice. These findings are
similar to those made in KPC mice [8]. Moreover, in 1 KPIC mouse,
the 2 hind legs were completely paralyzed at 13 weeks, and
histology revealed a tumor in the spinal cord (Figs not shown). The
mean survival of KPIC mice was longer than that of KIC mice (89 vs
62 days) (Fig 1B). Spontaneous KPC and (KPnullIC) tumors often
developed metastatic lesions [8, 11], but we did not observe
metastatic lesions in the livers of KPIC mice. The histology showed
that 3/5 mice developed typical ductal adenocarcinoma, and 2/5
mice exhibited high-grade panIN; both the adenocarcinoma and
high-grade panIN were rich in desmoplastic stroma, which are
similar to well-differentiated adenocarcinoma in KIC (Fig 1C and
1D). Human PC of ductal lineage expresses Sox-9 but pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors, acinar cell carcinomas and solid
pseudopapillary neoplasms rarely express Sox-9 [24, 25]. To
determine if the neoplastic cells in KPIC tumors have the
characteristics of ductal lineage, we stained tumor tissue with Sox-9
antibody, which showed that these KPIC tumor cells are positive for
Sox-9 staining, as shown in KIC tumor (Fig 1E). Taken together,
these findings show that spontaneous tumors in KPIC mice exhibit
characteristics typical of aggressive human PC.
Fig 1. KPIC mice formed a local invasive tumor with 3-months
mean survival.
[image]
Open in a new tab
(A) The gross anatomy of PC in a KPIC mouse showed cancer in the
tail and body of pancreas, and the swelling of small intestine. The
KPIC tumor locally invaded the neig