
Methods
Evaluation datasets
We used the two public metabolomics benchmark datasets in [17],
named as the TripleTOF 6600 dataset and the QE HF dataset. Both
datasets were acquired with the full-scan method. The TripleTOF
6600 dataset was acquired by AB SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 interfaced
with Shimazu L30A UPLC, and the QE HF dataset was acquired by
Thermo Q Exactive HF with Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC. A pair of
standard mixtures (SA, SB) were prepared for both datasets, which
were composed of seven differential groups of drugs and
metabolites (Gd1, Gd2, Gd3, Gm, Gd4, Gd5, Gd6) prepared at
different relative concentration ratios of (1/16, 1/4, 1/2, 1/1, 2/1,
4/1, 16/1) in SB: SA. The TripleTOF 6600 dataset had four
replicates for each mixture, with a total of eight runs. The QE HF
dataset had five replicates for each mixture, with a total of ten runs.
Benchmark libraries were provided along with the datasets,
containing 970 and 836 analytes in the TripleTOF 6600 and the QE
HF datasets. We further screened the benchmark libraries to remove
duplicates and obtained 924 and 835 analytes, respectively. In both
benchmark datasets, the retention times of mixed compounds have
different drift trends due to large differences in physical and
chemical properties (Additional file 1: Fig. S1). Even after retention
time alignment across runs, the retention times of analyte features
still had wide shifts, which increased the difficulty of feature
alignment and made the dataset more suitable for feature alignment
evaluation.
Furthermore, to evaluate the performance of feature alignment
methods on a bigger dataset, we used the dataset published in
Metabolights MTBLS562 [18]. The MTBLS562 dataset was acquired
with DDA method and acquired by AB SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 with
Agilent 1290 UHPLC system. The MTBLS562 dataset contains 40
LC–MS runs of 40 mice (C57BL/6J strain, SPF level) at 5 different
ages (4, 12, 24, 32 to 52 weeks, n=8 in each group). Benchmark
library was provided along with the dataset, containing 245
analytes. We further screened the benchmark library to remove
duplicates and noises and obtained 207 analytes. Some analytes in
the library have low abundance in samples with feature intensity
heights on the order of hundreds.
Input preparation
G-Aligner requires users to provide a list of extracted features for
each LC–MS run. G-Aligner supports feature extraction results in csv
and tsv formats, which can be exported from untargeted
metabolomics software. As a general method, G-Aligner only
requires users to provide basic feature information, including m/z,
retention time and intensity. In case of using profile-based retention
time alignment methods that require raw files (such as OBI-Warp),
users need to convert raw files to mzML format by MSConvert [19]
or aird format by AirdPro [20] for G-Aligner analysis.
Retention time alignment
To correct retention time drift and reduce the difficulty of
subsequent feature matching, G-Aligner provides a feature-based
retention time alignment method RANSAC (RANdom SAmple
Consensus) and a profile-based method OBI-Warp (Ordered
Bijective Interpolated Warping). RANSAC is an iterative method for
fitting a model to data and is robust to outliers. In each iteration,
the RANSAC method selects a random subset of points from the
input data and fits a linear or nonlinear model to these points. The
remaining points are then classified into inliers or outliers based on
their consistency with the model. Among the iterations, the best-
fitting model with the largest number of inliers is selected as the
alignment result. OBI-Warp is an extension of dynamic time
warping (DTW) for nonlinear retention time warping. For pairs of
runs that need to be aligned, OBI-Warp first uses DTW to analyze
the spectral similarity and obtain the optimal bijective warping
function by dynamic programming. OBI-Warp combines the
warping function output from DTW with piecewise cubic Hermitian
interpolation and produces smooth warped functions. G-Aligner
implemented OBI-Warp in Python for the first time and separated it
as an independent installation package for importing by other
Python-based software. These two algorithms were also applied in
MZmine2 and XCMS, respectively, and their effectiveness and
stability have been proven in long-term use. G-Aligner uses linear
RANSAC as the default retention time alignment algorithm because
it does not require additional raw file import and is faster and more
stable.
Feature matching
Graph building
Instead of matching features iteratively to a real or virtual reference
run, G-Aligner comprehensively considers potential feature
correspondences between all LC–MS runs and performs
combinatorial optimization to obtain optimal solutions. After
retention time coarse registration, the corresponding features of
each analyte in different runs are relatively close in m/z and
retention time coordinates. To find potential correspondences
among all runs, G-Aligner superimposes the retention time aligned
features in all runs on the same coordinate system consisting of m/z
and retention time dimensions, searches neighborhoods for each
feature according to the m/z and retention time tolerances set by
the user, and builds an undirected relation graph containing
features of all runs. Each node in the graph represents a feature,
and each edge represents a potential feature correspondence
between neighbor features.
Graph splitting
After graph building, spatially close feature nodes are connected
into many connected components, which are maximal connected
subgraphs of the relation graph. A connected component is the
largest set of potentially corresponding features for each contained
