
Materials and methods
The dynamic time warping algorithm
Dynamic Time Warping algorithm uses elastic matching, which can
correct for phase-shifts as well as distortions of the shape of the
signal, as illustrated in Figure 1A. For example, the peak in x1 is
matched to the peak in x2 when comparing the x1 and x2 with DTW
(Tomašev et al., 2015). At the conceptual level, the calculation of
the DTW distance of two time series x1 and x2 can be considered as
transforming one of the time series into the other one, i.e., DTW is
an edit distance. While doing that, each edit step is associated with
a cost and the final DTW distance is the sum of the costs of the
editing steps that are able to transform x1 into x2 with minimal
total costs. In particular, two editing steps are possible: (i) the
replacement of an element of x1 to an element of x2 and (ii)
elongation of an element of x1 or x2. In both cases, some elements
of the two time series are matched. The cost of a single editing
operation is the difference between the matched elements of the
two time series.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
(A) x1 and x2 time series compared with DTW: the i-th element of
x1 is elastically matched elastically matched to the appropriate
element of x2. (B) The filled-out DTW matrix plotted as a heat-map
(warmer color represents larger values), w denotes the size of the
warping window, the maximal allowed time-lag between two
matched time series element. The main diagonal is represented by
the dark red line, while the warping path is plotted with red. The
time-delay between the x1 and x2 time series at a given time-point
is given by the warping path's deviation from the main diagonal
(represented by the black arrows) (C) Calculation of DTW distance
by filling out the DTW matrix: the example shows the first six
element of x1 and first six element of x1 and x2 time series
highlighted with the black rectangle in (B). Elements of x1
corresponds to rows, while elements of x2 corresponds to columns
of the matrix. The optimal warping path is highlighted with dark
gray. (D) Formula to calculate entry (i,j)—in this example entry
(3,5): squared distance of x1(i) and x2(j) plus the minimum of the
matrix entries (i−1,j), (i−1,j−1), (i,j−1) (E) Optimal matching of
the first six elements of x1 and x2 revealed by the DTW matrix.
At the technical level, DTW distance is calculated by filling an l1-by-
l2 matrix, called DTW matrix, where l1 and l2 refer to the length of
time series x1 and x2, respectively. We use DTW(i,j) to denote the
(i,j)-th entry of the aforementioned matrix. The (i,j)-th entry of the
DTW matrix corresponds to the distance between the prefix of
length i of x1 and the prefix of length j of x2 and it can be
