
Methods
An overview of the Aird data structure is shown in Fig. 1, and the
main methods are described here:
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
A Traditional mzXML-like indexing, MS data is sorted by retention
time. The retention time and spectrum start position are stored as
an index. B In DDA, each MS1 spectrum is followed by 0-N MS2
data. Extracted ion chromatogram is generally calculated in
successive MS1 data, so reordering MS1 data to put them in the
same physical file block can speed up file reads. C Typically used in
SWATH/DIA, every MS2 data belongs to a particular m/z SWATH
window. MS2 data in the same window will be frequently accessed
and calculated. Reordering is essential for fast file I/O
ZDPD algorithm for m/z compression
The m/z array has the following characteristics.
1. In metabolomics and proteomics, the fragment mass is
generally between 0 and 3000;
2. The m/z arrays are ordered;
3. In the m/z array, there will be several consecutive numbers
close to each other, and the difference of these numbers is
relatively tiny and fixed;
We built a new compressor called ZDPD. The brief principle of
ZDPD is shown in Fig. 3B. Aird chooses the integer type as the
storage type for the m/z array. If the needed data precision is ten
ppm (100 daltons to calculate), the accuracy can be accurate to 3
decimal places (dp). If 0.1 ppm is needed, five dp is necessary. The
m/z array in each spectrum is an ordered array. Aird achieves the
best compression rate by combining FastPfor and Zlib algorithms
reasonably. FastPfor library is a suitable compressor to store deltas
between adjacent integers, benefiting from its particular
optimization. It also supports SIMD acceleration [8]. After
compressing the sorted integers, Aird uses the Zlib
algorithm(Compression Level = 6, Zlib library is DotNetZip from
http://dotnetzip.codeplex.com) to compress the delta values, which
can achieve a better result than only using the Zlib or FastPfor
algorithm. The combination of the two algorithms perfectly utilizes
the prior characteristics of the m/z array.
Fig. 3.
[image]
Open in a new tab
A Metadata with the same content is stored in JSON and XML
format, and Thermo QE and SCIEX TOF generate the files. File size
increased by about 65% when transferred from JSON to XML for
SCIEX TOF files and 1.7 times for Thermo QE files. B The principle
of the ZDPD algorithm. C The compression size is compared with
Zlib using each compression algorithm. The ratio increases as the
accuracy improve. The ZDPD algorithm shows the best
performance. D The encoding time for each algorithm. Due to SIMD
support, the FastPfor algorithm is high-speed. E The decoding time
for each algorithm. Decoding time is one of the most critical
parameters in the computation-oriented process. Although ZDPD is
not the fastest, the ZDPD algorithm's performance is the most
balanced when combining the compression rate and decoding speed
rate
Algorithm for intensity compression
Unlike the m/z array, the intensity data has a high degree of
repeatability, consistent with the Zlib algorithm's compression
characteristics. The results also show that Zlib has an excellent
performance in compression of intensity array. Therefore, Aird
chooses the Zlib algorithm as the intensity array's compressor. In
AirdPro, we also implement another optional compression
algorithm called "Log10 Compressor" proposed by MS-Numpress
[1].
Multiple indexing and storage strategies
Different acquisition modes have various computing features. For
example, when dealing with DIA/SWATH. The most frequently
calculated objects are the spectrums of the same precursor. They are
discontinuous in retention time(RT). Using the traditional model
based on RT will significantly reduce the reading efficiency and is
unsuitable for distributed reading. According to these various
features, Aird builds additional correlation indexes in the metadata
so that the program can read the data more quickly during analysis.
Aird will take the calculation features of different acquisition modes
as the core optimization point and provide a corresponding
integration interface in SDK as a computing-oriented format. Aird
also provides an RT-based data model that acts like mzML but has a
much higher compression ratio.
Aird does not use any database technology like HDF5 or SQLite but
also provides a similar querying ability. The spectrum querying
ability strategies mainly depend on mass spectrometry acquisition
modes. Different modes have different requirements for spectrum
index. If we can summarize and adapt the indexes of varying
acquisition modes, we can achieve the same query ability as using
database technology.
The MS data storage includes the index strategy and the disk's
actual storage location. For example, both mzXML and mzML
provide an index strategy by storing the scanning number and start
position of each spectrum, as it keeps specific MS data in the order
of the scanning number. Each scanning number represents a
particular RT. The indexing strategy of mzXML and mzML is
inflexible. Considering the Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) and
Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA), Aird described three indexing
and storage strategies:
1. RT-MS index: This is one of the most traditional indexing
strategies, which is also used in mzXML and mzML format.
This strategy is an efficient way to access successive MS data.
