
Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing,
Visualization
Find articles by Shoham Das
1, Yash Patel
Yash Patel
1Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Department, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA;
shohamda@usc.edu (S.D.); yashdhir@usc.edu (Y.P.);
kjiayiwang@gmail.com (K.W.)
Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Data curation
Find articles by Yash Patel
1, Kyle Wang
Kyle Wang
1Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Department, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA;
shohamda@usc.edu (S.D.); yashdhir@usc.edu (Y.P.);
kjiayiwang@gmail.com (K.W.)
Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data
curation
Find articles by Kyle Wang
1, John Tower
John Tower
1Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Department, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA;
shohamda@usc.edu (S.D.); yashdhir@usc.edu (Y.P.);
kjiayiwang@gmail.com (K.W.)
Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis,
Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing – original draft,
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration,
Funding acquisition
Find articles by John Tower
1,*
Editor: Susanne Neupert1
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13299798  PMID: 42355357
Simple Summary
Falls are a major source of human disability and death, with
interventions currently limited to exercise. Drosophila is a powerful
model system for the analysis of movement disorders and possible
interventions, both during normal aging and in Drosophila models of
human neurodegenerative disease. However, previous Drosophila
experiments have been limited by the inability to distinguish
between falls and downward jumps (downjumps). Here, individual
flies moving freely in a culture vial were analyzed using a single 58
fps video camera. Upward jumps were readily identified by positive
movement in the vertical direction. Advanced statistical and
machine learning tools were used to distinguish between falls and
downjumps. Falls were characterized by an initial velocity
consistent with simple acceleration due to gravity. By contrast,
downjumps were characterized by a greater initial velocity,
consistent with active propulsion by the fly. In agreement with
previous studies, aged flies moved less and explored a smaller
region of the vial. In addition, aged flies took longer to resume
movement after a fall, suggesting possible negative effects of falls.
These methods should facilitate future studies of the effects of aging
and neurodegeneration models on locomotor behaviors and falls,
including the testing of potential interventions.
Keywords: Drosophila, aging, falls, video, machine learning,
locomotor activity, computer vision
Abstract
Analysis of freely moving Drosophila captures complex movement
behaviors. However, previous experiments have been limited by the
inability to distinguish between falls and downward jumps
(downjumps). Here, individual flies moving freely in a culture vial
were recorded using a single 58 fps video camera. Upward jumps
were readily identified by positive movement in the vertical
direction. Several statistical and machine learning methods were
used to distinguish between falls and downjumps, including
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), K-Means Clustering, Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP), Hierarchical
Density-Based Spatial Clustering with Applications to Noise
(HDBSCAN) and Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP). Falls were
abundant and characterized by an initial velocity consistent with
simple acceleration due to gravity. Downjumps were more rare, and
were characterized by a greater initial velocity, indicating active
propulsion by the fly. Aged flies took longer to resume movement
after a fall, suggesting possible negative effects of falls. Falls in
young w[1118]-strain flies exhibited mid-event velocities that were
lower than expected, indicating some compensatory behavior that
was reduced in aged flies. These methods should facilitate future
studies of the effects of aging and neurodegenerative disease models
on locomotor behaviors and falls, including the testing of potential
interventions.
1. Introduction
In humans, both normal aging and neurodegenerative disease (ND)
are associated with locomotor impairments, including increased
falls. Falls are a significant cause of disability and death, and there
are currently no effective interventions known other than exercise
[1,2,3,4]. It is therefore of interest to leverage the Drosophila model
system to study the etiology of locomotor impairments, including
falls, with the ultimate goal of identifying environmental or small-
molecule interventions that might be relevant to human health.
Drosophila is a leading model system for the study of nervous
system function and animal behavior. The neuronal wiring diagram
and cell connectome have been mapped for the entire Drosophila
brain [5,6], and powerful transgenic tools enable modulation of the
activity of specific neuronal subsets, including individual neurons
[7]. Video analysis has been used to analyze several complex
Drosophila behaviors including flight, grooming, mating and
aggression [8,9,10,11].
Drosophila is also a leading model for the study of aging [12,13,14]
and for modeling human ND, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
and Parkinson’s disease (PD) [15]. Several methods have been used
to study how normal aging and the ND models affect Drosophila
locomotor behaviors. Drosophila activity monitors (DAMs) and
locomotor activity monitors (LAMs) employ infrared beams in the
fly container, and record each time the beam is disrupted by a
moving fly. These assays provide quantification of total fly
movement activity, which is observed to be reduced with age and in
the ND models. The negative geotaxis assay specifically measures
upward climbing speed after the fly is knocked to the bottom of a
cylinder, a behavior generally interpreted as an induced escape
response [16]. Negative geotaxis behavior is also reduced with age
and in Drosophila ND models [17,18,19]. Drosophila have also been
assayed for 2D locomotor behaviors while moving freely in a Petri
dish-shaped arena [20], and for 3D locomotor behaviors while
moving freely in a culture vial [18,21], including assays of 3D
movement trajectories using synchronized video cameras [22].
These studies have revealed locomotor behaviors associated with
imminent mortality, including bouts of erratic movement (as
indicated by increased frequency of directional heading changes),
and supine behavior (fly lying on its back) [21,22,23,24,25].
Several previous studies of Drosophila have described events where
the fly drops rapidly through space from a higher position in the
observation chamber to a lower position, and these drops have
sometimes been referred to as “falls” depending on the context in
which they were observed. For example, Lobato et al. [26] used 30
fps video to analyze flies as they climbed upwards in a negative
geotaxis assay. Flies were observed to occasionally drop during
climbing, and they defined drops of greater than 11.7 mm as “falls”.
Similarly, Canic et al. [27] used 30 fps video to analyze flies as they
climbed upwards in the negative geotaxis assay, and defined drops
of greater than 12 mm as “falls”. Finally, in our recent study,
YOLOv4 machine learning software was trained to recognize drops
in 30 fps videos of freely moving flies [28]. In that study, the
frequency of drops was found to peak proximal to death associated
with normal aging or as produced by dehydration/starvation stress.
Those events were interpreted to most likely represent “falls”,
because they increased in the hours before death when total
movement activity had significantly decreased. One limitation of
the previous studies is that 30 fps video analysis cannot
unambiguously distinguish between a true fall, where the
downwards velocity results only from acceleration due to gravity,
and a downjump, where the downwards velocity will include
additional acceleration produced by the fly.
Analysis of falls and downjumps is of particular interest, because
the inability of aged flies to right themselves after a fall is
implicated as one cause of death [22,23,24,25]. Here a single 58 fps
camera was used to record individual flies moving freely in a
culture vial. Custom software (MotionDetection version 2.1,
MDv2.1) was developed to track fly movement trajectories, and
analysis of drop velocities and other metrics revealed distinct
behaviors, including falls, downjumps, upward jumps (upjumps)
and arced jumps (arcjumps).
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Drosophila Culture and Strains
Drosophila melanogaster flies were cultured at 25 °C and 65–80%
humidity under a 12 h:12 h light–dark cycle using standard agar/
dextrose/corn meal/yeast media [29]. Several strains were obtained
from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center (BDSC,
Bloomington, IN, USA). Strain y[1] w[1118]; P[w[+mC] = UAS-
APP.Abeta42.E693G.VTR]4 (BDSC #33773, abbreviated here as
“UAS-Abeta42”, is a UAS-controlled transgene containing the
human amyloid β42 protein with the E693G mutation [18]. Strain
w[*]; P[w[+mC] = UAS-Hsap\SNCA.A30P]40.1 (BDSC #8147,
abbreviated here as “UAS-SNCA”) is a UAS-controlled transgene
encoding the A30P mutant of human α-synuclein [30]. Strain
P[w[+mW.hs] = GawB]elav[C155] (BDSC #458, abbreviated here
as “elav-GAL4”) yields neuronal GAL4 expression driven by the elav
gene promoter [31]. The w[1118] reference strain (w[1118]-iso; 2-
iso; 3-iso) has been previously described and sequenced [32,33].
This strain was previously cleared of Wolbachia by three generations
culture on doxycycline followed by confirmation using PCR as
described [34]. Each transgenic strain was backcrossed nine
generations to the w[1118] reference strain. To generate flies with
pan-neuronal expressio