
Materials and methods
The experiment was conducted at the University of Idaho, Nancy M.
Cummings Research, Education, and Extension Center, Carmen,
Idaho (45.286,549, -113.889,786; elevation 1159 m) in the fall of
2016 and subsequent spring of 2017. The research station is in
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) plant hardiness
zone 5a (-28.9 to -26.1°C; USDA 2012) with an average annual
precipitation of 305 mm, while the experimental grazing was
conducted on farm ground under center pivot irrigation. All
livestock were maintained in accordance with acceptable animal
practices as outlined in the Guide for the Care and Use of
Agricultural Animals in Agricultural Research and Teaching (FASS
2020). The research protocol was reviewed and approved by the
University of Idaho Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(#2016-39).
Experimental design
The experiment was divided into three phases including fall
planting of cover crops, the recording the presence or absence of elk
and deer on cover crops in the fall, sampling of forage the
subsequent summer to estimate forage yield and quality.
Fall planting of cover crops
On September 1, 2016, approximately 3 ha under center pivot
sprinkler irrigation was divided into nine 0.33 ha plots, and three
cover crop mixes were randomly assigned to plots resulting in three
replications of each cover crop mix. The three cover crop forages
and respective planting rates included canola (Brassica napus; 3.3 
kg/ha; canola), crimson clover (Trifolium incarnatum; 3.3 kg/ha;
clover), and purple top turnip (Brassica rapa; 3.3 kg/ha; turnips).
Additionally, all plots received the same mix of winter triticale
(Triticosecale; 31.3 kg/ha), Austrian winter peas (Pisum sativus subsp.
arvense; 20.1 kg/ha), and hairy vetch (Vicia villosa; 7.8 kg/ha). Pivot
irrigation (35.6 L/ha) of the cover crops on a bi-weekly basis
occurred from planting until October (Oct) 1, 2016. Cover crops
received no irrigation until the following spring of 2017. Cover
crops were irrigated by pivot irrigation on a bi-weekly basis from
May 1, 2017, until the start of the grazing period at which time
irrigation was stopped.
Wildlife data collection
Starting in late Oct 2016, forage plots were occupied intermittingly
by elk and deer until most forage disappeared from the field by
early December (Dec) 2016. These were free ranging deer and elk,
and no artificial methods were used to coerce wildlife either onto
and(or) off the plots, and no livestock grazed cover crop plots
during the experiment. It should also be noted that no on-the-
ground forage samples or forage density measures were collected
during the fall period. One of the challenges of utilizing game
cameras in wildlife detection is that entire populations of animals
cannot be individually identified and tracked across the area being
monitored (Rowcliffe et al 2008; Newey et al 2015). However,
recording detections allows researchers to better understand animal
density, location, and temporal movement patterns (Rowcliffe et al
2008; Newey et al 2015; Moeller et al 2018). With this in mind,
game cameras were placed at opposite corners of the nine plots to
record absence and presence of deer and elk across each of the
different forage plots to solely evaluate wildlife numbers. From the
daily record of game camera photos, we made also made
retrospective and comparative observations between photos to
evaluate forage presence and disappearance for all plots throughout
the fall period. Several indirect measures were used to evaluate
forge presence and disappearance over time. As presented in
Figs. 4–6, observations were made of the area adjacent to the
grooves left by the pivot wheels, the height of forage that appeared
around the hooves and legs of deer and elk, and forage presence/
absence at the distinct demarcations between cover crops.
Additionally, remote sensing technology of the Range Analysis
Platform (Jones et al 2021) was used to determine 16 d forage
biomass estimations during the fall period to provide an alternative
method to quantify forage disappearance.
Figure 4.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Pictures of representative cover crop pastures at the start of the trial
(October 19) including a) clover, b) canola, and c) turnips. Note:
tracks left by pivot wheel are surrounded and partially covered by
growing forages in all three cover crops.
Game cameras recorded daily wildlife activity from Oct 19, 2016,
through Dec. 7, 2016, across the study area. Two game cameras
(Moultrie M-888, Birmingham, AL), one in the opposite corner of
each small plot (9 plots with 18 total cameras), were mounted on t-
post that allowed recording of images in front of each camera. The
field of view of each camera did not overlap with the opposite
corner camera, which allowed cameras to record images
independent of each other. Motion detection had a range of
approximately 15 m performed by passive infrared sensor and a
nighttime flash reach of approximately 21 m. From Oct 19 to
November (Nov) 1(herein called Period 1), game cameras were
programmed to record a single image every minute from 1600 to
0800 daily with motion detection images recorded from 0800 to
1600 hour. The authors felt that by taking an image every minute at
night would enhance wildlife detection since a picture is always
taken and was not dependent on animal motion to trigger detection.
From Nov 1 to Dec 7 (herein called Period 2), cameras were placed
on motion detect to record images 24-h a day. All images were
recorded on microSD cards, which were changed on a bi-weekly
basis. Images were retrospectively evaluated using Timelapse (v
2.2.4.3; Greenberg 2021) image recognition software for image
analysis and data recording. For each recorded image, which was
designated to represent one minute, the following information was
recorded for both elk and deer: absence (designated as 0) and
presence (designated as 1), total number of animals present, image
date and timestamp, and temperature. If multiple images were
recorded for a motion detection event lasting less than or equal to
one minute, an average number of animals was calculated to
represent that minute. No more than 60 data points were recorded
over a one-hour period. Image data were subsequently summarized
on an hourly basis for each 24-hr day from Oct 19 to Dec 7 for deer
and elk separately, summarized data included total detections per
hour, absence “0” or presence “1” for each hour, and average
temperature per hour. Where no deer or elk were present in images
or no motion detection images were recorded, all values were
recorded as zeros for that camera. After hourly images were
analyzed for each camera, hourly data from each camera of the two
cameras in a pasture were combined. Hence, pasture became the
eventual experimental unit for camera data resulting in three
pastures per cover crop type. Light and dark periods were
determined using a sunrise-sunset calendar (https://
www.sunrisesunset.com/USA/) for the geographic location of
Carmen, ID (45.2,424,203, -113.8,934,018). The light period of a
day was included 30 min before sunrise until 30 min after sunset
(light), whereas the dark period was considered the remaining time
(dark). This information combined with the date/timestamp
information on images were used to classify whether images were
in the light or dark time periods of a 24-h day.
Summer forage harvest and sampling
At the initiation of spring growing season (Summer 2017) three
fenced exclosures (0.80 m2) were randomly placed within each of
the nine plots (three plots for each of the three-cover crop) resulting
in a total of 27 exclosures for determination of cover crop yield and
quality. For each of the replicated cover crop plots, there were three
harvest dates based on growth stage of triticale and the first harvest
was initiated June 12 at the early heading stage to optimize forage
quality and yield. The second harvest was June 28, equivalent to
anthesis, and the third harvest was July 10, equivalent to soft
dough stage. All above-ground plant material within the exclosure
boundaries were clipped to a stubble height of approximately 5 cm
and a wet forage weight was recorded for all forage harvested. A
representative sub-sample was collected from each exclosure
harvest and dried in a forced-air oven (60°C) to determine forage
dry matter (DM) which was calculated as the ratio of dry subsample
weight to its fresh subsample weight. Total dry matter yield for the
plot was obtained by multiplying the plot fresh weight by the dry
matter percentage. Forage yield was calculated using area of the
sampling quadrat (0.80 m2) to convert plot-level dry matter yield to
metric tons per-hectare basis. After drying, sub-samples were
ground in a cyclone mill to pass through a 1-mm screen (Retsch
Mill, Haan, Germany). Wet chemistry was conducted on forage sub-
samples by a commercial lab (Cumberland Valley Analytical
Services, Waynesboro, PA) to determine nutrient and mineral
composition. Nutrient analyses included the determination of crude
protein (CP), total digestible nutrients (TDN), acid detergent fiber
(ADF), neutral detergent fiber (NDF), and non-carbon content
(ASH). Mineral analysis included the macrominerals (expressed as a
percent) of calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), phosphorus (P), sodium
(Na), and potassium (K), and the microminerals (expressed as parts
per million; ppm) of iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), and
