
Materials and methods
Chemicals
LC/MS grade methanol from Fisher Scientific (Geel, Belgium), Milli-
Q ultra-pure water from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany), and LC/MS
grade formic acid > 99% of HiPerSolv Chromanorm were used as
an HPLC eluent system. Thirty-eight reference standards of high
purity in addition to five deuterated internal standards (IS) were
used in this work. A complete list of these can be found in the
supporting information, in Tables S1 and S2, respectively.
Studied samples
The samples were obtained from the wastewater treatment plant
(WWTP) influent of an industrial park, comprising roughly 40
chemical plants. The influent samples are 24-h consecutive
composite samples. Based on the metadata, the influent is
dominated by (1) several HPLC-HRMS detectable chemicals with
relatively high concentrations, and (2) a large number of chemicals
present in lower quantities. The first category of substances
necessitates the dilution of the influent samples. This procedure,
however, further reduces the concentration of the second category
of chemicals, posing a challenge to their detection. The presence of
some chemicals is not constant, and their concentrations vary
significantly with time, based on the production.
In this study, different types of samples were considered, and QAQC
samples were used for software parameter optimization and
instrument performance monitoring. QC samples for software
comparison was prepared by spiking 38 target compounds into
eluent A to a final volume of 1 mL. Five levels of concentration (5–
100 μg/L) were used. The 50 μg/L samples were initially used for
optimizing software parameters, while the full concentration range
supported evaluation of area-concentration linearity. All samples
were spiked with four ISs prior to analysis and analyzed in
triplicate. The limits of detection (LODs) and recovery rates are
presented in Table S3. For method validation, two types of spiked
wastewater samples were generated using standard target
compounds that followed predefined temporal intensity patterns,
serving as ground truth. The background matrix for validation set I,
representing a matrix under controlled condition, were prepared by
pooling of a batch of representative wastewater samples. Each of
the 53 vials contained 100 μL of this matrix combined with 900 μL
of eluent A. Each vial was then spiked with eight target compounds
according to predefined intensity profiles, as detailed in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Reference intensity profiles for eight spiked targets in validation
dataset I (53 replicate injections of a pooled wastewater matrix).
The temporal patterns were derived from SCIEX OS and used to
assess trend detection
The consistency of the matrix composition across these vials
allowed focused evaluation of software sensitivity and trend
detection under low-variability conditions. In contrast, validation
dataset II aimed to reflect real-world complexity. It consisted of 52
individual 24-h composite influent wastewater samples collected on
consecutive days. After centrifugation for 1 min at 2500 rpm
(Centrifuge, 400 Function Line, Heraeus, Germany) and a tenfold
dilution with Milli-Q water, each sample was spiked with five ISs
and nine chemical standards at a concentration range of 8 μg/L to
350 μg/L, following temporal trends outlined in Fig. 2. The samples
were once measured before the spiking to ensure the absence of
these substances in the data matrix. All samples were measured in
triplicates.
Fig. 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Reference intensity profiles for nine compounds spiked into
validation dataset II (52 consecutive daily influent samples) to
simulate real concentration fluctuations. Profiles were derived from
SCIEX OS. The characterization of target profiles can be categorized
as follows: left-sided spill profiles (Var237-238), wide spills
(Var239-240), short-lived spills (Var241-243), right-sided spill
(244), and episodic pattern (Var245)
LC-HRMS acquisition
A 5-μL aliquot of sample was injected into an Agilent 1290 Infinity
HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany), into a
C18 column and pre-column, namely the Trident cartridge (10 × 
2.1 mm) and stainless steel filter (2 mm, 0.5 μm) connected to a
Ultra Aqueous C18 (end-capped and modified with polar functional
groups 100 mm × 2.1 mm, 3.0 μm particle size), both from Restek
