
Experimental system and plan
Testing system
The experimental system comprises a test pipeline, a gas
distribution system, an ignition system, a pressure data acquisition
system, a high-speed camera system, and a synchronous control
system. The test pipeline is made of transparent plexiglass with a
wall thickness of 20 mm and a pressure resistance of 2 MPa. It is
divided into three sections: Pipe 1, Pipe 2, and Pipe 3. Pipe 1 has a
horizontal length of 500 mm and an internal cross-sectional size of
80 mm×80 mm; Pipe 2 has a horizontal length of 1000 mm and an
internal cross-sectional size of 60 mm×60 mm; Pipe 3 has a
horizontal length of 500 mm and an internal cross-sectional size of
80 mm×80 mm. One end of the test pipeline is completely sealed,
while the other end is sealed with PVC film. The gas distribution
system includes a methane cylinder, an air compressor, and two gas
mass flow controllers, used to prepare premixed gas of desired
concentrations of methane and air. The ignition system comprises a
high-energy igniter and an ignition electrode, with an ignition
voltage of 6 KV and an ignition energy of 2.5 J. The ignition point
is located 100 mm from the left sealed end. The pressure data
acquisition system comprises an MD-HF high-frequency dynamic
pressure sensor and a USB-1608FS data acquisition card, used to
collect pressure data generated during the explosion in real time.
The acquisition frequency of the high-frequency dynamic pressure
sensor is 20 K/s. The high-speed camera system captures images of
the flame development process at a frequency of 2000 fps, with a
pixel resolution of 1024 × 1024, used to capture the shape of the
explosion flame and the position of the flame front. The
synchronous control system controls the ignition system, pressure
data acquisition system, and high-speed camera system to operate
according to a preset start-stop sequence and interval. The
schematic diagram of the experimental system is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Schematic diagram of the experimental system. The experimental
setup consists of a transparent plexiglass pipeline with three
variable-cross-section segments, a gas distribution system, a high-
energy igniter, high-frequency pressure sensors, a high-speed
camera, and a synchronous controller. The pipeline includes two
80 mm × 80 mm sections (Pipe 1 and Pipe 3) and a 60 mm ×
60 mm section (Pipe 2). Coal dust is placed 100 mm from the
ignition point. The system enables real-time synchronization of
ignition, pressure acquisition, and flame imaging.
The connection of the test system is shown in Fig. 1. Connect the
various components of the test system according to the diagram.
Before each test, lay a layer of PVC film at the position indicated by
the PVC film in the diagram. Lay coal dust of a preset concentration
at the horizontal center position of the pipeline 100 mm from the
ignition point at the left end of the test pipeline. The preparation
work is complete. Simultaneously, open the inlet and exhaust valves
to start ventilation, control the intake of air and methane through
the gas flow controller, and then inject a certain concentration of
methane air premixed gas into the pipeline, and the original gas in
the pipeline is discharged through the exhaust port at the end of the
pipeline. To ensure that the original gas in the pipeline is
completely discharged, the gas volume injected into the pipeline is
set to 4 times of the pipeline volume. After inflation, close the inlet
and outlet valves, start the pressure acquisition and high-speed
imaging system, and ignite the explosion process after a delay of 10
ms. After the experiment, sort out the data and clean the pipeline
for the next group of experiments.
Experimental plan design
In the experiment, the test results often vary significantly due to
different components of middling coal powder. To obtain the exact
composition of the middling coal powder used, the ash content,
moisture, volatile matter, fixed carbon, and other components of
the test coal sample were measured according to GB212-2008
“Industrial Analysis Method of Coal”. The analysis results are shown
in Table 1. The coal dust concentration was uniformly set at 100 g/
m3, and the coal dust particle size was 48–75 μm. Prior to each test,
the coal dust samples were dried in a vacuum drying oven at 60 °C
for 4 h to eliminate the influence of moisture. The ambient
temperature during the experiments was maintained at 22 ± 2 °C,
and the relative humidity was controlled at 50% ± 5% using an air
conditioning system. To ensure uniform deposition and high
repeatability, a precise quantity of coal dust (calculated based on a
concentration of 100 g/m³ and the pipeline cross-sectional area)
was weighed using an electronic balance (accuracy 0.01 g). The
coal dust was then evenly sprinkled onto a 200 mm-long section of
the pipeline floor, starting 100 mm from the ignition point (i.e., the
left sealed end), forming a uniform deposited dust layer. The gas
used in the experiment was methane gas with a purity of 99.99%.
The gas concentration was set at two levels, namely 8.5% and
