
Methods
For this investigation, data were collected using GoPro action
cameras attached to harnesses on three dogs, providing footage
from their first-person perspective. The data, which total nearly 2
hours, were analyzed using CA methods.
Results
We focus on dog-walking sessions where the dog summons the
human to pick up its ball. The human arrives and either picks up
the ball or leaves it on the ground to kick it later. This sequence is a
pre to the exercise that occurs when the human returns the ball to
the dog: the human throws or kicks the ball for the dog to catch.
We identified two sequential occurrences in pre-sequences where
human and non-human animal meaning-making processes
intertwine: (1) the moment after the human’s expected answer in
the second position arrives, allowing the dog proceeds to the third
position closing turn (dog runs) or directly to the main sequence
(dog remains in place), and (2) the moment when the dog initiates
a repair due to the lack of an expected answer by the human.
Common to these occurrences is that they highlight the dog’s
expectations regarding the human’s action in the second position of
the pre-sequence.
Discussion
These findings suggest that cognition is sequentially situated within
the relationship between the pre-sequence and the main sequence,
indicating how occurrences in the pre-sequence materialize in the
main sequence. Cognition is grounded in the sequential
development that facilitates the entire exercise through cooperation
with the other participant.
Keywords: cognition, conversation analysis, dogs, interspecies
pragmatics, meaning-making, pre-sequence
1. Introduction
Throwing balls, sticks, and various small items for pet dogs to fetch
is a common everyday activity for many dog owners. However,
dogs can also initiate ball games with humans. This article
considers dogs’ active participation in organizing these games.
Recent developments in the understanding of interspecies
pragmatics (Peltola and Simonen, 2024) indicate that humans and
non-human animals can jointly organize the progression of social
interaction. Such mutual orchestrating can occur during ball games.
This study elaborates on the well-known exercise of “throwing a
ball to the dog” to inform pragmatic analysis about animal
involvement in this process. Our interest relates to the question of
meaning: How are dogs, or non-human animals in general, part of
our meaning-making processes? Pragmatic analysis can offer
valuable insights into this question.
Interspecies pragmatics is an interdisciplinary approach in the
Humanities and Social Sciences aimed at redefinind the hierarchical
boundaries between humans and non-humans (Peltola and
Simonen, 2024). It expands the view of pragmatics (Verschueren,
1999), which is based on language studies informed by
conversation analysis (CA) (Sidnell and Stivers, 2013). Interspecies
pragmatics thus focuses on interspecies interaction, where a human
speaker and an animal speaker (Cornips, 2022) can produce turns
that both participants and researchers can recognize as meaningful
actions (Mondada, 2018; Mondémé, 2023). Both human and animal
actions can be classified into first and second pair parts of
sequences. For example, Rossano (2013) identified a first action and
a responsive action, while Mondémé (2023) found two sequence
types: “summons-answer” and “request-compliance.” Interspecies
interaction can unfold in larger sequential structures, such as
sequences of sequences (Peltola and Simonen, 2024). Researchers
contributing to interspecies pragmatics can investigate the
relationship between human and animal actions and the practices
used to accomplish them. Studies have shown that horses use their
actions to negotiate joint decisions with humans, such as in training
a non-competent rider (Szczepek Reed and Lundesjö Kvart, 2025),
and that interspecies partners engage in greetings (Nilsson and
Norrthon, 2024). A recent study by Cornips and Wels argues that, in
addition to human knowledge, interspecies meaning-making
requires emotions, touching, and multimodal engagement (Cornips
and Wels, 2025).
Original CA studies found that social interaction is organized in
turns of talk (e.g., Sacks et al., 1974). In our interspecies case, turn-
taking in ball games is organized in embodied turns, which may
limit other players. Consider the following: “While holding onto the
ball, dogs and people entice their partner to try get the ball by
moving it toward the partner, but limiting the likelihood that the
partner can actually get the ball.” (Mitchell, 2015, pp. 31–32).
Turn-taking organization in conversation can be seen as the
“primordial site of sociality” (Schegloff, 1987, p. 102). But how is
turn-taking in ball games organized without conversation? Views
emphasizing an audio-based understanding of interaction
(Schegloff, 2009) lack a perspective for multimodal features of
interaction (see, e.g., Heath and Luff, 2013, p. 304). As noted also
by Cornips and Wels (2025), multimodal features, such as embodied
actions, may still benefit from the integration of audio-based
materials (Simonen, 2023). From the perspective of interspecies
pragmatics, the primordial site of sociality needs reworking to
capture non-human animals’ (non-verbal) participation with
humans.
Interspecies pragmatics is based on a tradition that emphasizes
considering evidence of psychological dimensions in the description
of the researched phenomenon (Verschueren, 1999, p. 271). Prior
studies on interspecies pragmatics have not investigated cognition
in interspecies interactions. Hence, this study contributes to the
field of interspecies pragmatics by introducing cognitive
perspectives. This is achieved by drawing relevant findings from CA
studies on cognition (Potter and Edwards, 2013) and comparing our
findings with those. By doing so, this study brings cognitive
questions and tensions into the realm of interspecies pragmatics.
Interspecies pragmatics expands human-centered views by
considering non-human animals. Unique among pragmatic
approaches, it benefits from the finding that interspecies
participants can co-create meaning without spoken or written
language (Simonen, 2023). In line with recent developments in
interspecies pragmatics (Simonen, 2023; Peltola and Simonen,
2024; Nilsson and Norrthon, 2024; Szczepek Reed and Lundesjö
Kvart, 2025; Peltola and Grandgeorge, 2025), this article
investigates evidence of animal actions involved in human meaning-
making processes, particularly through interactions between
humans and dogs. We ask what kind of evidence could illustrate the
involvement of animal actions in human meaning-making during
interaction. Such evidence would challenge the anthropocentric
assumptions of approaches that deny the possibility of animal
action in human meaning-making processes.
2. Background
Pragmatics explores language both as a form and in a relation to
behavior (Verschueren, 1999). The latter perspective concerns
empirical evidence of behavior that holds meaning for the
participating individuals. This empirical evidence must be based on
interpretation and cognitive processing (Verschueren, 1999, p.
271). Echoing ethnomethodological studies (Garfinkel, 1967),
pragmatics pertains to meanings “which are ‘worked out’ on
particular occasions of use” (Cruse, 2006, p. 136). Previous studies
have identified several key meanings that are “worked out” in
human–dog ball play. Mitchell (2015) investigated human–dog play
with a particular focus on creativity in interaction. Following
Henricks (2015, p. 226) in Play and the Human Condition, play
should be broken down into its elemental components to reveal the
meanings it carries. According to Mitchell (2015):
•  Participation in the activity is collaborative and supports a
form of friendly competitive play, shaped by the distinct
projects of the human and the dog.1
•  The other participant’s actions function as a resource for
creativity; for example, each partner could act as a “sparring
partner,” with an expectation of mutual improvement.
•  The ball used by the dyad exhibits a degree of
unpredictability in its movement, creating opportunities for
both partners to initiate novel actions.
•  Interspecies ball play could also include unusual actions—
such as faking a ball toss—which might stimulate the
recipient’s creative responses.
•  The human and dog appear as equal partners who share a
common orientation toward engaging in play.
It has been noted that (neo-)pragmatic research can engage in “an
ongoing engagement with the otherness,” which may offer “richer
forms of collective redescription” (Baert and da Carreira Silva,
2010, p. 304). Such engagement with the otherness may refer to
non-human animals. Engagement with non-human animals could
offer new possibilities for understanding. The authors continue:
“The question [is] how we can learn from the encounter with the
unfamiliar to challenge … and think differently” (Baert and da
Carreira Silva, 2010, p. 305).
One way to think differently is to consider features that were once
expected to be found exclusively in humans; Willgohs et al. (2023)
report that recent studies in animal cognition have found evidence
of non-human animals’ competencies in cooperation, problem-
solving, planning, and tasks such as counting. Their own study
focused on creativity in dogs and found that dogs are fluent in
“producing novel ideas” (Willgohs et al., 2023, p. 8). Still, Bräuer
(2014) argued that no evidence exists showing that dogs understand
human intentions, implicating lack of theory of mind in dogs
(Premack and Woodruff, 1978). Merritt (2021, p. 353) observed
that studies on canine cognition focusing on the mechanisms of
interspecies interactions have received little academic attention;
because human and dog play occurs in interaction, it seems possible
to investigate “the ways in which cognition is inherently
intersubjective” (Merritt, 2021, p. 356; emphasis in original).
Thus, what happens in 