
Methods
Ten patients with locally advanced cervical cancer were
retrospectively investigated with SFRT. The dose prescription was
30 Gy in 5 fractions to 90% target volume coverage. Peak-and-
valley (SFRT_1) and peak-only (SFRT_2) strategies were applied to
generate the heterogeneous dose distributions. The planning
objectives for the target (CTV) were D90% ≥ 30 Gy, V45Gy ≥ 50–
55% and V60Gy ≥ 30%. The planning objectives for the organs at
risk (OAR) were: D2cm3 ≤ 23.75 Gy, 17.0 Gy, 19.5 Gy, 17.0 Gy for
the bladder, rectum, sigmoid and bowel, respectively. The plan
comparison was performed employing the quantitative analysis of
the dose-volume histograms.
Results
The D2cm3 was 22.4 ± 2.0 (22.6 ± 2.1) and 13.9 ± 2.9 (13.2 ± 3.0)
for the bladder and the rectum for SFRT_1 (SFRT_2). The results for
the sigmoid and the bowel were 2.6 ± 3.1 (2.8 ± 3.0) and 9.1 ± 5.9
(9.7 ± 7.3), respectively. The hotspots in the target volume were
V45Gy = 43.1 ± 7.5% (56.6 ± 5.6%) and V60Gy = 15.4 ± 5.6%
(26.8 ± 6.6%) for SFRT_1 (SFRT_2). To account for potential
uncertainties in the positioning, the dose prescription could be
escalated to D90% = 33–35 Gy to the CTV without compromising
any constraints to the OARs
Conclusion
In this dosimetric study, the proposed novel planning technique for
boosting the cervix uteri was associated with high-quality plans,
respecting constraints for the organs at risk and approaching the
level of dose heterogeneity achieved with routine brachytherapy.
Based on a sample of 10 patients, the results are promising and
might lead to a phase I clinical trial.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at
10.1186/s13014-021-01838-x.
Keywords: VMAT, RapidArc, Cervix uteri cancer, Spatially
fractionated radiation therapy, Virtual brachytherapy
Introduction
At the global level, the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer
are high with more impact in low-mid income countries (LMICs)
due to lack of screening, vaccination against the human
papillomavirus, and overall limited access to care [1]. Concurrent
chemo-radiotherapy is the standard of care, with the radiotherapy
component consisting of external beam treatments followed by
brachytherapy (BT, intracavitary ± interstitial). The utilisation of
the BT boost has been established as providing remarkable benefit
in terms of disease control [2, 3]. The omission of brachytherapy is
also associated with detriment in survival [4].
The application of brachytherapy is dependent on two factors: (1)
availability of brachytherapy facilities, radioactive brachytherapy
sources, and associated experienced clinical teams, and (2) contra-
indications to BT, primarily due to very advanced stages of the
disease. If any of these two factors apply, it would be desirable to
expand the radiotherapeutic options panel with practical
techniques.
The use of advanced techniques based on external beam therapy has
been explored in this perspective. Concerning stereotactic body
radiotherapy (SBRT), Albuquerque [5] reported a phase II trial for
locally advanced cervical cancer in a phase II trial. The outcomes
were inferior with SBRT, and the trial was closed due to the severe
toxicity profile. The authors suggested that better case selection
might be needed, and the boost volume should be better defined.
Small tumours in patients unable to receive standard BT were
suggested to be best eligible for SBRT.
In the domain of the alternatives to BT, the concept of spatially
fractionated radiotherapy (SFRT), lattice or grid therapy techniques
have been proposed already in the 1950s [6], and a variety of
solutions have been utilised, requiring either dedicated metallic
grids (physical compensators) or multileaf collimators (MLC) [7].
Griffin [8] comprehensively reviewed the state of the art for SFRT,
concluding that SFRT technology developments are needed,
mechanisms of action should be investigated, and clinical outcomes
should be tested in well-designed controlled studies to confirm the
relevance and potential of SFRT. Yan [9] outlined the relevance of
SFRT in delivering inhomogeneous radiation therapy to various
clinical indications such as head and neck, lung breast, gynecologic
and sarcoma cases. Zhang [10] suggested that a more standardised
approach might facilitate advances in the clinical management of
bulky tumours employing SFRT.
Suppose GRID or SFRT based on physical devices might imply some
challenges (e.g. the need for dedicated infrastructure). In that case,
the virtualisation of the dose patterns generation might simplify
many aspects. The removal of additional hardware pieces such as
physical compensators, the flexibility of software-based solutions,
and the simplified dose calibration issues are the factor of appeals
for a MLC-based solution.
Amendola [11] proposed a lattice radiotherapy technique consisting
of volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) for gynaecological
tumours. Their solution was to distribute manually contoured
spheres (15) of 1 cm diameter that were added inside the gross
tumour volume and planned to deliver a 2.4 Gy/fraction dose. In
contrast, the wider volume received 1.8 Gy/fraction. Pokher [12]
proposed an MLC generated lattice pattern of 10 mm diameter and
20 mm centre-to-centre separation. No flexibility in the shape and
geometrical features of the patterns were proposed, but the
dosimetric results proved the potential appeal of the virtualised
frame of work. Choi [13] reported clinical outcomes with virtual or
physical GRID devices for palliative radiotherapy in head and neck
cancers in a cohort of 21 patients. Murphy, in a retrospective in-
silico study, [14] proposed the use of virtual GRID therapy for the
treatment of breast cancers in the prone position.
The primary aim of this current in-silico investigation was the
creation and validation, at the treatment planning level, of a novel
and flexible method enabling SFRT. The scope was to develop
appropriate tools to generate some virtual rods of free diameter,
length, position and carving. These rods would be used as “seeds”
to optimise hot dose regions with a peak-and-valley or peak-only
patterns within a given target volume. The key dosimetric objective
to be achieved was the simultaneous generation of sufficiently hot
dose regions within the target to mimic the clinical benefit of
brachytherapy and the minimisation of the organs at risk
involvement to reduce the toxicity reported from stereotactic body
radiotherapy [5]. The clinical context tested was the boost course in
a radiotherapy course for cervical cancer, comparing dosimetric
endpoints with reference data from conventional brachytherapy.
The idea underlying the SFRT concept presented here is that its use
could be extended to any other clinical case suitable for highly
heterogeneous dose deliveries.
Materials and methods
Patients selection, contouring and dose prescription
This retrospective in-silico investigation was performed on a group
of 10 patients selected from an institutional database. The chosen
patient data sets were patients with locally advanced cervical
cancer (FIGO 2009 Stage IIB). All patients had baseline T2 W MRI
images. Soft tissue fusion with contrast-enhanced CT was performed
to facilitate delineation of CTV. Patients were chosen such that their
clinical target volumes at brachytherapy were representatives of
patients with significant residual disease (high-risk CTV > 30 cm3)
at the time of brachytherapy such that the impact of these relatively
large targets could be studied for both target coverage and organ at
risk sparing. The target delineation consisted of the high-risk
clinical target volume (CTV), including the primary gross tumour
volume and the remaining cervix not infiltrated by the tumour as
described in [15]. For the planning study purposes, this volume was
assumed to be the target for the boost course, either with SBRT or
with BT (although in a real clinical case, a new planning CT would
be acquired to define it at the end of the first course of
radiotherapy). For consistency, it was named CTV. With the
assumption described above, for consistency with BT practice and
the dosimetric study purpose, no formal expansions were
considered to generate a planning target volume (PTV) to be
considered to optimise the dose plans. Nevertheless, to appraise the
robustness of the planning technique to (minor) setup uncertainties,
plans were also appraised for PTVs with margins of 2 or 5 mm from
the CTV (PTV2mm and PTV5mm).
The bladder, the rectum, the sigmoid and the bowel bag were
considered as Organs at Risk (OAR) for this study.
The dose prescription to the CTV was set to 30 Gy in 5 fractions
normalised to the 90% coverage level (i.e. the dose covering 90% of
the CTV was normalised to 30 Gy); this was done for consistency
with the clinical practice in the case of a brachytherapy boost.
Besides the coverage requirement, additional planning aims to the
CTV were applied to the volume receiving at least 45 Gy and at
least 60 Gy (150% and 200% of the prescription): V45Gy ≥ 50–55%
and V60Gy ≥ 30%. These reference values were derived from
institutional data from MRTI guided image-based brachytherapy for
patients treated as per the GEC_ESTRO guidelines. Cases were
chosen randomly, and average V45Gy and V60Gy were computed and
compared to those obtained from the dataset used to optimise with
the rods.
For the OARs, the clinical aims in the study were defined for the
near-to-maximum dose (at 2 cm3 of volume). This was set as D2cm3 
≤ 23.75 Gy, 17.0 Gy, 19.5 Gy, 17.0 Gy for the bladder, rectum,
sigmoid, and bowel, respectively so that near-to-maximum
cumulative (i.e. inclusive of phase 1 external beam radiotherapy
course of 45 Gy, after conversion to 2 Gy/fraction) would be: D2cm3
to the bladder, rectum, sigmoid and small bowel were ≤ 65 Gy, ≤ 
80 Gy, ≤ 70 Gy and ≤ 65 Gy respectively. Upper limits to the
clinical aims were set to: 19.45, 27.5 21.65, 19.45 Gy, respectively.
The planni