
Materials and methods
Sample preparation
S. caninervis moss was obtained from Gurbantunggut Desert in
northwest China. A small clump of S. caninervis was placed in a
Petri dish and stored in a closed laboratory drawer. The storage
conditions were ambient temperature (20 °C) and a relative
humidity of 20%, with no exposure to light. No water was supplied
during storage (around 12 months). Moss samples in different
hydration conditions were all prepared at a temperature of 23 °C, a
relative humidity of 20%, and an illumination of approximately 20
µmol photons m–2s–1, after having been gently blown with a mild
nitrogen flow to remove surface contaminants such as dirt, sand, or
dust. All samples were measured in demountable circular quartz
cuvettes with an optical path length of 0.01 mm (QS 124; Helma),
in which leaves were slightly pressed between windows, and sealed
with glue. Before measurements, samples were kept in the dark for
at least 1 h.
Dehydrated samples consisted of small pieces of S. caninervis taken
directly from their long-term storage conditions. Hydrated samples
were obtained by placing the moss on a piece of filter paper soaked
in deionized water. Several drops of deionized water were then
added directly onto the plant material to ensure complete coverage
with water. The samples were rehydrated under these conditions for
30 min, after which they were gently blown with a mild nitrogen
flow to remove excess surface water and then sealed in the quartz
cell. Desiccated samples were obtained by placing a small piece of
dehydrated S. caninervis in a glass vial without lid and maintaining
it for 6 h at 40 °C in an oven. Then, the sample was cooled down to
RT and sealed into the circular quartz cell. After measurements,
which involve cooling the samples down to 16 K, these desiccated
samples were rehydrated following the same protocol as for
preparing hydrated samples and re-measured to ensure the
reversibility of the desiccation treatment. Such samples are labeled
below as Rehydrated.
Equipment
Picosecond time-resolved FL measurements were performed with a
streak camera system (Hamamatsu C5680) using synchroscan
regime. Samples were excited with a femtosecond Yb: KGW laser
(Light Conversion Ltd.) generating 80 fs duration pulses at 1030 nm
wavelength, which was halved to 515 nm using HIRO harmonics
generator (Light Conversion Ltd.), at a repetition rate of 76 MHz.
Excitation energy density was attenuated using neutral density
filters to about few hundreds nJ cm− 2. Excitation was focused
using fused silica plano-convex lens (LA4924; Thorlabs) with a focal
length of 18 cm into ~ 100 μm spot on the sample. The time
resolution of the system was ∼10 ps. Signal acquisition time was
20–30 min for each measurement. Although carotenoids absorb
significantly at 515 nm, chlorophyll absorption also remains non-
negligible at this wavelength, allowing efficient excitation of the
photosynthetic apparatus. Since excitation energy absorbed by
carotenoids is rapidly transferred to chlorophylls within the LHCs,
the FL detected in our experiments predominantly originates from
chlorophyll emission.
Additional time-resolved FL microscopy measurements were
performed using a configuration different from that used for the
spectroscopic time-resolved FL measurements. The microscopy
measurements employed the same laser source and detection
system, but the sample was placed in a microscope equipped with a
10× plan achromatic objective (0.25 NA, 10.6 mm WD; Olympus)
