
Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft,
Writing – review & editing, Visualization
Find articles by Allyson McGowan
1, Santanu Banerjee
Santanu Banerjee
1Department of Chemistry and Physics, Tougaloo College,
Tougaloo, MS 39174, USA
Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Funding
acquisition
Find articles by Santanu Banerjee
1, Jing Wang
Jing Wang
2Department of Chemistry, Physics and Atmospheric Sciences,
Jackson State University, Jackson, MS 39217, USA
Conceptualization, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing –
review & editing
Find articles by Jing Wang
2, Wojciech Kolodziejczyk
Wojciech Kolodziejczyk
2Department of Chemistry, Physics and Atmospheric Sciences,
Jackson State University, Jackson, MS 39217, USA
Find articles by Wojciech Kolodziejczyk
2, Jerzy Leszczynski
Jerzy Leszczynski
2Department of Chemistry, Physics and Atmospheric Sciences,
Jackson State University, Jackson, MS 39217, USA
Validation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project
administration, Funding acquisition
Find articles by Jerzy Leszczynski
2,*
Editors: Sung-Kun (Sean) Kim, Usama Ashraf
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC11592782  PMID: 39590339
Abstract
Even though COVID-19 is no longer the primary focus of the global
scientific community, its high mutation rate (nearly 30 substitutions
per year) poses a threat of a potential comeback. Effective vaccines
have been developed and administered to the population, ending
the pandemic. Nonetheless, reinfection by newly emerging
subvariants, particularly the latest JN.1 strain, remains common.
The rapid mutation of this virus demands a fast response from the
scientific community in case of an emergency. While the immune
escape of earlier variants was extensively investigated, one still
needs a comprehensive understanding of how specific mutations,
especially in the newest subvariants, influence the antigenic escape
of the pathogen. Here, we tested comprehensive in silico
approaches to identify methods for fast and accurate prediction of
antibody neutralization by various mutants. As a benchmark, we
modeled the complexes of the murine antibody 2B04, which
neutralizes infection by preventing the SARS-CoV-2 spike
glycoprotein’s association with angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE2). Complexes with the wild-type, B.1.1.7 Alpha, and
B.1.427/429 Epsilon SARS-CoV-2 variants were used as positive
controls, while complexes with the B.1.351 Beta, P.1 Gamma,
B.1.617.2 Delta, B.1.617.1 Kappa, BA.1 Omicron, and the newest
JN.1 Omicron variants were used as decoys. Three essentially
different algorithms were employed: forced placement based on a
template, followed by two steps of extended molecular dynamics
simulations; protein–protein docking utilizing PIPER (an FFT-based
method extended for use with pairwise interaction potentials); and
the AlphaFold 3.0 model for complex structure prediction.
Homology modeling was used to assess the 3D structure of the
newly emerged JN.1 Omicron subvariant, whose crystallographic
structure is not yet available in the Protein Database. After a careful
comparison of these three approaches, we were able to identify the
pros and cons of each method. Protein–protein docking yielded two
false-positive results, while manual placement reinforced by
molecular dynamics produced one false positive and one false
negative. In contrast, AlphaFold resulted in only one doubtful result
and a higher overall accuracy-to-time ratio. The reasons for
inaccuracies and potential pitfalls of various approaches are
carefully explained. In addition to a comparative analysis of
methods, some mechanisms of immune escape are elucidated
herein. This provides a critical foundation for improving the
predictive accuracy of vaccine efficacy against new viral
subvariants, introducing accurate methodologies, and pinpointing
potential challenges.
Keywords: SARS-CoV-2, mutations, molecular dynamics, protein–
protein docking, AlphaFold, homology modeling, immune escape,
benchmark
1. Introduction
Mutations in SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, were a
significant topic of research and concern throughout the pandemic.
These mutations can alter the virus’s features, including its
transmissibility, virulence, and interaction with the human immune
system. Some mutations may increase the virus’s infectivity or
transmissibility, while others might decrease them [1,2]. Viral
evolution has led to the emergence of variants of concern, such as
Delta and Omicron (since late November 2021) (Figure 1a), which
raised concerns about possible immunity evasion and increased
transmissibility [3]. Occurred mutations may impact the
effectiveness of approved medications and vaccinations [4]. Thus,
understanding their impact on viral properties is extremely
important.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Mutations in SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain: (a) mutation
progression over time (Figures are adapted from Nextstrain.org,
used under a CC-BY-4.0 license; https://nextstrain.org/ncov/gisaid/
global/all-time (accessed on 1 May 2024)); (b) scheme of spike
neutralization by 2B04 antibody; (c) list of mutations occurring in
RBD of selected mutant structures.
Significant progress has been made in understanding SARS-CoV-2
mutant immune escape using experimental methods. Classifications
and structural analyses shed light on the immune responses against
SARS-CoV-2 [5], providing a blueprint for the design of antibody
cocktails as immunogens for vaccines. In [6], the spike
glycoprotein’s N-terminal domain was identified as a promising
target for therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against
COVID-19. Specifically, the 4A8 mAb exhibited high neutralization
potency against authentic and pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 without
binding to its receptor-binding domain (RBD). Eleven potent
neutralizing antibodies against COVID-19 were identified in [7].
With a large number of experimental works concentrating on the
Wild-Type (WT) RBD or selected mutants [5,6,7,8,9,10,11], some
works provide a more comprehensive picture for the comparison of
mutant immune escape [12,13,14,15,16]. The pseudovirus system
makes deep mutational scanning of the complete SARS-CoV-2 spike
possible. In [17], the genotype–phenotype-linked lentivirus
pseudotyping method served as the basis for a mutational scanning
platform to produce libraries of the Omicron BA.1 and Delta spikes.
Nonetheless, the high cost of these assays makes evaluating a wide
range of variants and strains experimentally challenging. This
results in significant knowledge gaps that require further, more
exhaustive, and more detailed investigation of the influence of
mutations.
Computational methods allow for high-throughput analysis of big
datasets, enabling researchers to systematically evaluate how
mutations affect antibody binding and neutralization across various
variants. Experimental studies alone may not capture the full
spectrum of antigenic changes associated with SARS-CoV-2 mutants.
Based on structure- and sequence-based analyses, computational
approaches can predict the antigenic effects of mutations, offering
insights into how mutations change the immune system’s detection
of the virus. Molecular dynamic (MD) simulation and Molecular
Mechanics/General Born Surface Area (MM/GBSA) have been
shown to be promising tools to explore the effect of mutations on
the binding affinity of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
[18,19,20,21,22,23] and human angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE2) [19,24,25,26,27] against the receptor-binding domain
(RBD) region of the S protein. Various computational tools, such as
AMBER (V 16, V 18, and V 20), GROMACS (V 2022.5), NAMD (V
2.13 and V 2.14), and Desmond (V 3.0), have been utilized. MD
simulations are often enhanced by combining them with other
approaches, such as density functional calculation [8] or FoldX 5.0,
as used in [28] to predict escape mutations, focusing on the SARS-
CoV-2 receptor-binding domain. Protein–protein docking is another
widely employed approach for examining the RBD’s protein–protein
interactions. This computational technique allows one to predict the
binding pose and interactions between proteins with high precision.
Various servers and tools are utilized to facilitate these studies. For
instance, the ClusPro 2.0 server has been extensively used to model
RBD–ACE2 interactions, providing valuable insights into their
binding mechanisms [29,30]. Similarly, the HDOCK server supports
a range of applications, including the analysis of RBD–ACE2
interactions [31], RBD interactions with amyloidogenic proteins
[32], intraviral protein–protein interactions [33], and SARS-CoV-2
Orf7a/LFA-1 complexes [34]. The PatchDock and COVID-19
Docking Server were used for a drug discovery purpose, targeting
RBD/ACE2 interactions using potential peptide-based drugs [35].
HawkDock was utilized in [36] to investigate the RBD–ACE2
interactions. As an alternative to physics-based methods, machine
learning (ML) techniques have gained popularity and are widely
implemented to study protein–protein interactions of SARS-CoV-2.
These include an artificial intelligence-based framework, UniBind
[37]; the Pipeline for the Extraction of Predicted Protein–Protein
Interactions (PEPPI) [38]; various classifiers [39,40,41]; and
language models [42], among others. The recently introduced
AlphaFold 3 model, which is available for non-commercial use,
demonstrates substantially high antibody–antigen prediction
accuracy [43].
This work aims to compare and evaluate existing approaches and
tools for the rapid and accurate assessment of antigen–antibody
interactions, focusing on their potential influence on immune
escape. As a benchmark model, we used experimental results from a
study on SARS-CoV-2 neutralization by two murine antibodies
targeting the RBD [13]. In this work, murine antibody 2B04 was
shown to neutralize the spike glycoprotein RBD of specific variants
by blocking its i