
Methodology, Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Lucas M Martini
1,2,*, Anna Bognár
Anna Bognár
3Department of Neuroscience, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
4Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Methodology, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Writing
– review & editing
Find articles by Anna Bognár
3,4, Rufin Vogels
Rufin Vogels
3Department of Neuroscience, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
4Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition,
Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Rufin Vogels
3,4, Martin A Giese
Martin A Giese
1Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research (HIH) and Centre for
Integrative Neuroscience (CIN), University Clinic Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany
2International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems
(IMPRS-IS), Tübingen, Germany
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project
administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Martin A Giese
1,2,*
Editor: Matthew F S Rushworth5
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13367704  PMID: 42447116
Abstract
Social interactions are essential for survival in primates, relying on
both facial expressions and body signals. The accurate
characterization of these signals is critical for understanding the
neurocomputational mechanisms underlying social communication.
While previous work has focused on recognizing monkey behavior,
a causal and direct manipulation of individual cues strongly
benefits from believable, dynamic body avatars—analogous to those
successfully developed for faces. Creating lifelike monkey avatars
with realistic body motion, however, is challenging. Acquiring
sufficiently accurate movement data for animation with marker-
based motion capture is impractical, and markerless tracking
methods require extensive manual labeling. To address this, we
developed MacAction, a realistic macaque body avatar animated
from multi-camera markerless tracking data. Our method
reconstructs accurate trajectories for a large number of keypoints,
as required for the 3D animation of realistic body models. The
entire time course of individual actions is captured using only two
labeled keyframes per second, with performance further validated
on a large-scale human multi-view dataset. We assessed the
animation quality of our dynamic avatar in a free-viewing
experiment with eight macaque observers for single macaque
actions, where fixation behavior was indistinguishable between our
animations and matched real videos. Moreover, by systematically
varying the realism of the avatar, we found an uncanny valley effect
in macaque body perception, similar to that previously described in
both humans and macaque faces. These findings support the
commonalities of social vision across primate species, providing a
foundation for controlled experiments aimed at clarifying the
detailed neurocomputational mechanisms of social body perception
in primates.
Social interactions in primates rely on both facial expressions and
body signals, but creating lifelike monkey avatars with realistic
body motion is challenging. This study presents MacAction, a
realistic macaque body avatar animated from multi-camera
markerless tracking data, and reveals an uncanny valley effect in
macaque body perception, similar to that described in humans.
Introduction
Because of their genetic and physiological similarities to humans,
rhesus macaques are the most widely studied nonhuman primate
(NHP) species in biological disciplines, such as neuroscience,
psychology, ethology, behavioral ecology, and medicine [1–4].
Scientific results from macaques have also been fundamental for
understanding many biological functions in humans [5,6], and
specifically human vision [7–9]. Macaques are a major model
species for understanding human social perception, since they allow
studies at the single-neuron level within a visual system that is
highly similar to that of humans. Understanding these processes is
critical not only from the viewpoint of neuroscience but also due to
the growing number of technical applications that rely on the
perception of digital human bodies, including games, film, virtual
try-on [10,11], the metaverse [12], and clinical applications [13].
However, the computational and neural mechanisms involved in
processing bodies in the primate brain remain poorly understood
[14–16]. To clarify these mechanisms, experiments in psychology
and neuroscience typically expose humans or monkeys to visual
stimuli that manipulate underlying visual features in controlled
ways [17–19]. The difficulty in studying body perception lies in the
generation of dynamic body stimuli that can be exactly controlled.
Avatars of monkeys, unlike real-world videos of behaving animals,
offer the advantage of precise control over all relevant stimulus
features and timing. However, creating these stimuli is challenging.
Accurate motion data for their animation is not easily obtained, and
such synthetic stimuli must guarantee a high level of realism to
ensure the ecological validity of experimental results. Although
monkey face avatars have been used successfully in the study of
dynamic facial expression perception [20,21], to date, there have
been no attempts to create lifelike monkey body avatars with
realistic motion.
The digital reconstruction of a macaque’s moving body is a
challenging problem. As with other animals, the amount of
available tracking data from monkeys is limited [22], and creating
datasets comparable in size to those for humans is impractical [22–
26]. Moreover, standard motion capture technology is not
applicable for recording full-body motion of macaques. Positioning
markers reproducibly on their dense fur is difficult, and the animals
typically remove or destroy body-attached markers during
grooming. In addition, attached markers might alter their natural
behavior, making deep-learning based markerless video tracking the
only viable solution.
Various datasets that capture poses of monkeys in single-view
images have been published [27–30]. However, tracking the
dynamic body of NHPs in 3D space remains difficult, as monkeys
exhibit a high-dimensional pose space comparable to that of
humans. Recent multi-camera approaches have succeeded at the
reconstruction of small sets of 3D keypoints for behavioral analysis,
exploiting setups with a considerable number of cameras and
extensive hand-labeling [31–33]. Such small marker sets, however,
are insufficient for the animation of realistic avatar models with
many degrees of freedom (DOF). At the same time, extending these
methods for larger marker sets with sufficient tracking accuracy
would result in impractically high amounts of required hand-
labeling.
The use of computer-generated stimuli still raises the question of
ecological validity, and even stimuli that appear realistic to humans
might not do so to monkeys. In fact, it has been shown that as the
realism of artificial agents or robots is continuously increased,
observers might actually dislike artificial stimuli with high but not
perfect levels of realism. This effect has been termed the "uncanny
valley" (UV) according to an early paper in robotics that has
formulated this hypothesis (Mori [34,35]). This phenomenon has
nowadays been exploited to assess whether graphics-generated
stimuli or robots appear realistic enough [36–40], and an UV has
also been demonstrated in macaque observers for the recognition of
static [41] and dynamic monkey faces [21]. Whether this effect also
exists for monkey bodies is unknown.
Addressing the two key challenges of obtaining sufficiently accurate
motion-tracking data from macaques for computer animation and
generating animations with an appropriate level of realism, we have
developed MacAction, a method for generating and validating
highly realistic animations of macaque bodies based on markerless
video motion capture. The core of our approach is a method for
retrieving accurate 3D markerless pose trajectories for a large
number of keypoints based on high-resolution multi-camera footage
(Fig 1). It exploits learning-based methods in combination with
different triangulation post-processing to reconstruct densely
sampled action sequences from a small number of labeled
keyframes. This enables the generation of realistic 3D animations of
complex commercial avatars at high frame rates, requiring as few as
only two labeled frames per second (LPS). Our method thereby
substantially improves tracking accuracy compared to other
macaque pose estimation methods in behavioral analysis [42], and
we validate the realism of our animations in an eye fixation
experiment with real monkeys. Not only do we show that the
animals perceive our animations (S1 Video and S2 Video) as very
similar to real-life video footage, but we also demonstrate the
existence of an uncanny valley effect for bodies in NHPs. This
makes our approach suitable for controlled investigations of the
psychological and neurocomputational processes underlying body
and social perception in primates.
Fig 1. MacAction animates 3D markerless pose
tracking to generate realistic synthetic images.
[image]
Open in a new tab
a, Pipeline for character animation: selection of actions from sets of
synchronously recorded videos from multiple viewpoints. A neural
network-based tracking algorithm predicts keypoint trajectories for
all frames of an action (shown in blue), exploiting a very small
subset of hand-labeled keyframes for training. The retargeting
process then maps this motion onto a 3D avatar. The resulting
animation can be embedded into a 3D model of the background
scene, which can be rendered from any viewpoint. b, Generated
images of the virtual action over time. c, Compariso