
Methods S1.
2.1. Nuclei segmentation and consensus
Per-nucleus colocalization of puncta requires accurate 3D
segmentation to properly map puncta to their proper nuclei.
zFISHer independently segments on the unregistered nuclear
channels prior to registration to allow flexibility during manual
puncta curation and inform downstream registration and warping.
zFISHer provides a modified classical watershed pipeline consisting
of downsampling, Gaussian smoothing, Otsu thresholding,
anisotropy-corrected distance-transform peak finding, and over-
segmentation merging (Otsu, 1979. Additionally, native integration
of Cellpose is included for challenging fields (Stringer et al., 2021).
Each segmentation mask is annotated with a unique ID and a
centroid for downstream processing, such as puncta assignment
(Section 2.2) and consensus nuclei mask generation following
downstream cross-round z-stack alignment (Section 2.4). The
interactive mask editor permits manual mask refinement, including
painting, deletion, and z-dimensional extrusion. While the
underlying segmentation algorithms (Otsu thresholding, watershed,
Cellpose) are well-established, zFISHer’s contribution lies in
anisotropy-aware modifications, over-segmentation merging, per-
round mask editing, and downstream cross-round consensus
generation in a unified environment.
2.2. Detect-then-transform puncta processing
A core design decision of zFISHer was to perform puncta detection
on unaligned image inputs and then transform the coordinates into
the unified canvas space. This approach allows detection on the
original signal to avoid interpolation artifacts. Four 3D detection
algorithms are included: local maxima, Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG),
Difference of Gaussian (DoG), and a modified radial symmetry
algorithm (Parthasarathy, 2012). The radial symmetry
implementation was modified for 3D detection, and refines each
candidate to sub-voxel precision via weighted least-squares
gradient-ray intersection. LoG, DoG, and radial symmetry utilize
anisotropic Gaussian kernels with sigma vectors (σ*dz/dx,σ,σ) to
match the elongated geometry typical in FISH z-stacks. Pre-
processing background subtraction is provided via a per-slice white
top-hat filter. Each detected puncta is annotated with coordinates,
intensity, SNR, and a unique ID.
2.3. The Fishing Hook algorithm
Manual annotation of puncta in 3D FISH volumes is a time-
consuming step of the analysis. A common concession is to reduce
the image volume to 2D maximum intensity projections. However,
this fails to resolve puncta at similar XY positions but different Z
depths typical in crowded fields. Navigating individual z-slices is
slow, subjective, and imprecise, as puncta in FISH fields tend to
span across adjacent slices, making the identification of the true
signal centroid challenging, if not impossible. Automated detection
is imperfect and requires manual verification in practice.
Despite advances in 3D image processing and visualization,
resolving 3D depth remains a challenge for 2D interactions because
cursors do not have meaningful depth. Intensity-based depth
resolution was popularized by Vaa3D (Peng et al, 2014) for tracing
neurons in standalone C++ environments. It is available in
commercial tools such as Imaris (Bitplane), but the functionality is
lacking in modern, open-source, Python-native ecosystems for FISH
analysis workflows. Contemporary Python-based tools such as
napari-threedee (Yamauchi and Burt, 2023) focus on plane-based
interactions and geometric intersections but do not leverage image
data for coordinate snapping.
The Fishing Hook algorithm was developed for zFISHer to provide a
fast and intuitive method for users to identify unannotated puncta
directly in the 3D image volume. The algorithm uses the camera
orientation and cursor position to construct a multi-point ray
through the volume that is normalized via anisotropy-aware voxel
scaling. Intensities are sampled at each point position along the ray
to identify the brightest voxel candidate. Then, an optional local 3D
neighborhood search refines the candidate position to the highest
intensity peak in a defined radius to correct for cursor offset.
Redundant annotations are handled by an integrated collision
detection threshold. The implementation is detailed in
Supplementary Methods 1.6.
2.4. Multi-round registration and warping
Multiple rounds of sample processing between rounds of image
acquisition produces inter-round drift. Global transformations can
correct the rigid components, but elastic nonlinear deformation
presents the greatest challenge for image alignment for accurate
molecular spatial profiling. zFISHer addresses inter-round volume
alignment with a three-phase process: RANSAC-based rigid
alignment on nuclei centroids (Fischler and Bolles, 1981), channel-
type-aware deformation for refinement, and coordinate-space
unification of nuclei masks and puncta.
Rigid alignment uses R1 and R2 nuclei centroid clouds to estimate a
coarse shift by vector voting on all pairwise differences. Nearest-
neighbor correspondences are identified with a 3D KD-tree. A
custom 3-DOF translation model is then fit with RANSAC. A
translation-only model was chosen to prevent overfitting
characteristic of affine models fit to sparse correspondences, and
excessive deviation triggers reversion to the coarse shift. Each
round volume is then padded to a unified canvas space. The
optional second-stage channel deformation applies B-spline
transform (Rueckert et al., 1999) to the rigidly aligned R2 channel
using 4-node mesh per axis, Mattes mutual information, and L-
BFGS-B optimization. The transformation is applied to all R2 image
channels with channel-type-aware interpolation: B-spline for
nuclear channel and linear for the remaining image channels.
Following alignment and warping, the per-round nuclei masks are
unified to a consensus mask via KD-tree with an adaptive distance
threshold. Masks can be merged in union or intersection, and nuclei
centroids are recomputed upon completion. Puncta coordinates are
transformed by applying the canvas offset, rigid shift, and an
iterative inverse B-spline, and then re-indexed against the consensus
nuclei masks. The implementation is detailed in Supplementary
Methods 1.7–1.9.
2.5. Colocalization and analysis
Sequential FISH experiments are primarily performed to map
molecular spatial profiles of multiple elements within the nucleus.
Colocalization analysis in zFISHer is performed on puncta
coordinates following registration and warping to ensure accurate
inter-round calculation in unified nuclear space. To maintain
consistency across datasets, resolutions, and acquisitions, all
distance calculations operate in physical units (micrometers) using
voxel scaling derived from the input dataset OME-XML metadata.
Both pairwise and tri-channel colocalization modes are provided.
Pairwise colocalization performs a bidirectional 3D radius search
between two channels using a KD-tree. Every unique spot pair
within a user-defined threshold is reported as a positive hit. Tri-
channel colocalization uses a greedy assignment strategy on an
anchor channel and two additional channels to mimic a biological
model of multiple elements localizing to a single spatial locus.
While more rigorous approaches for tri-channel colocalization exist,
such as MultiMatch (Naas et al., 2024), the greedy strategy
prioritizes interpretability and speed. All puncta of both child
channels within the user-defined radius threshold of an anchor
channel puncta are enumerated. The greedy algorithm iteratively
picks pairs of channel A/B puncta that are closest to the anchor and
removes them from the pool to prevent double counting until no
valid triplets remain. For convenience, a separate nearest-neighbor
distance list is compiled for every point in every channel against
every other channel to produce a comprehensive background
distribution. Metrics are compiled for reporting, including per-hit
tables, per-nucleus aggregates, and summary statistics. The
implementation is detailed in Supplementary Methods 1.10–1.11.
2.6. Batch and headless processing
Sequential FISH experiments generate multiple sets of image pairs
per study, and manual analysis of each dataset through interactive
GUIs is time-consuming and variable across multiple operators.
zFISHer addresses this by enabling fully automated execution of all
stages of analysis independent of user interaction. The headless
architecture can be executed through custom scripting or CLI
commands for implementation into larger workflow pipelines. For
users without programming experience, a GUI-initiated batch
processing mode provides the same automated execution. The
multi-sheet input template allows full parameter configuration and
definitions for all stages of the analysis. The templates are validated
against each input dataset before execution to prevent mid-run
failure. All outputs (masks, puncta CSVs, reports, session, logs) from
each dataset pair are written to unique subdirectories under a batch
parent output root directory for provenance. This enables overnight,
unattended, and unbiased processing for large FISH datasets. The
finished sessions can then be loaded into zFISHer for refinement,
curation, and additional analysis if needed. The implementation is
detailed in Supplementary Methods 1.1.
