
Methodology, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Haipeng Yu
4, Gota Morota
Gota Morota
1School of Animal Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA; yebi@iastate.edu
5Laboratory of Biometry and Bioinformatics, Department of
Agricultural and Environmental Biology, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo
113-8657, Japan
Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Data curation, Funding acquisition, Project administration,
Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing
Find articles by Gota Morota
1,5,*
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13205377  PMID: 42194963
Abstract
Background: Quantitative genetic analysis of image- or video-
derived phenotypes is increasingly being performed for a wide
range of traits. Pig body weight values estimated by a conventional
approach or a computer vision system can be considered two
different measurements of the same trait but with different sources
of phenotyping error. Previous studies have shown that trait
measurement error, defined as the difference between manually
collected phenotypes and image-derived phenotypes, can be
influenced by genetics, suggesting that the error is systematic rather
than random and is more likely to lead to misleading quantitative
genetic analysis results. Therefore, we investigated the effect of trait
measurement error on the genetic analysis of pig body weight (BW).
Results: Calibrated scale-based and image-based BW showed high
coefficients of determination and goodness of fit. Genomic
heritability estimates for scale-based and image-based BW were
mostly identical across growth periods. Genomic heritability
estimates for trait measurement error were consistently negligible,
regardless of the choice of computer vision algorithm. In addition,
genome-wide association analysis revealed no overlap between the
top markers identified for scale-based BW and those associated with
trait measurement error. Overall, the deep learning-based
regressions outperformed the adaptive thresholding segmentation
methods. Conclusion: This study showed that manually measured
scale-based and image-based BW phenotypes yielded the same
quantitative genetic results. We found no evidence that BW trait
measurement error could be influenced, at least in part, by genetic
factors. This suggests that trait measurement error in pig BW does
not contain systematic errors that could bias downstream genetic
analysis.
Keywords: body weight, camera, genome-wide association analysis,
heritability, phenomics, swine
1. Introduction
The power of quantitative genetic analysis largely depends on the
quality and quantity of available phenotypes. Computer vision
approaches are rapidly being developed to generate phenotypes for
genetic analysis in livestock [1]. Computer vision coupled with
cameras is one of the precision livestock technologies to realize
precision livestock farming, which aims to automate phenotyping or
monitoring animals at the individual level on a continuous basis
[2]. An advantage of computer vision systems is that they can be
installed in a barn with minimal disruption to daily farm operations
and are relatively inexpensive, requiring only one or a few off-the-
shelf consumer cameras [3]. Pedigree-based or genomic-based
genetic analysis of image- or video-derived traits is increasingly
being performed on growth or morphological traits [4,5,6,7,8],
carcass traits [9,10,11,12,13], behavior [5,14] and feed intake [7].
Computer vision is the core engine for phenotyping these live
animal traits, except for carcass traits, which are collected after
slaughter.
Computer vision is not necessarily always required to collect the
above phenotypes, but traditional approaches often require
additional hours of manual workload or the purchase of expensive
equipment that requires careful maintenance. For example,
collecting growth or morphological traits requires a digital scale
with manual labor to restrain the animals or a costly walk-over
weighing system. Similarly, manually monitoring individual feed
intake requires constant observation and estimation of
measurements by humans. Collecting behavioral traits requires
many hours of behavioral video decoding by ethologists based on a
formal ethogram. What distinguishes computer vision-based
phenotyping from conventional phenotyping is the ability of the
former to scale up and perform high-throughput phenotyping by
automating all or part of the phenotyping procedures.
Consider a scenario where we are interested in phenotyping a
specific target trait. This target trait, collected using conventional
and image- or video-based approaches, can be considered two
different measurements of the same character because they have
different phenotyping errors. In other words, two measurements of
the target trait are controlled by the same set of causal loci, but the
source of phenotyping error is different. Then, we can calculate a
trait measurement error, which is defined as the difference between
the conventional phenotypes and the image-derived phenotypes.
Because these two measurements of the same trait have the same
genetic architecture, it is assumed that trait measurement errors are
random and nongenetic factors (Figure 1). However, previous
research has shown that trait measurement error can be influenced,
at least in part, by genetic factors. For example, maize biomass was
quantified using manual measurements and image-based estimates
[15]. Although they obtained the Pearson correlation coefficient of
0.95 between the manual measurements and image-based estimates,
58% of the trait measurement error in biomass was explained by
genetic variation. Similarly, 27–59% of the trait measurement error
variance was controlled by genetic variation using single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) data in sorghum height; the Pearson
correlation coefficient between manual measurements and image-
based estimates was 0.96 [16]. They also identified a few
significant genomic regions when trait measurement errors were
used as phenotypes in genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
These results suggest that phenotypes of some individuals are
systematically underestimated, and phenotypes of some other
individuals are systematically overestimated. Because trait
measurement error is systematic rather than random in these cases,
if these image-derived phenotypes were used in quantitative genetic
analysis, it could lead to misleading results.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Concept of trait measurement error when using computer vision to
generate image-derived phenotypes.
This type of problem can also occur in livestock. For example, the
live body weight (BW) of animals is often estimated from a single
top-view depth sensor camera [17,18]. Height and volume
information that can be estimated from a depth sensor camera is
known to be highly correlated with scale-based BW in animals
[19,20]. When estimating volumetric measures from a depth sensor
camera, it is assumed that the distance from the ground to the
ventral abdomen is constant for all animals. However, this
assumption is not valid if some sires or boars carry genetics that
increase the distance from the ground to the ventral abdomen in
their offspring, resulting in a systematic error in image-derived BW
estimates. Although an increasing number of animal phenotypes are
generated by computer vision, the effect of trait measurement error
on quantitative genetic analysis has not been investigated. In
addition, it is unknown how the choice of computer vision
algorithms can influence trait measurement error in downstream
genetic analysis.
Therefore, in this study, we investigated the impact of trait
measurement error on the genetic analysis of pig BW. Specifically,
the objectives of this study were (1) to estimate trait measurement
error from manually collected and image-derived pig BW, (2) to
evaluate how the choice of computer vision algorithms affects the
genetic analysis of trait measurement error, and (3) to estimate
genomic heritability and marker effects for trait measurement error.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Animals and Data Collection Design
A subset of pig data analyzed in Bi et al. [20,21] was used in this
study. In short, we analyzed data from more than 600 crossbred
pigs raised on a farm in North Carolina, USA. The pigs were part of
a commercial finishing operation at Smithfield and were regularly
weighed during four farm visits or time points (T1 to T4) between
July and September 2023. The number of pigs phenotyped varied at
each visit, but it decreased at later time points, primarily due to
market sales. Animals were fed a common diet and had unrestricted
access to water. Pigs were weighed individually on a digital walk-in
calibrated scale to ensure they were restrained and properly
positioned for accurate measurements. Their BW ranged from 25 to
154 kg. The average BW (kg) of pigs at T1, T2, T3, and T4 was 65
(103), 78 (117), 92 (131), and 114 (159), respectively, where
values in parentheses indicate average age (days).
2.2. Video Acquisition Setup
A depth video acquisition setup is detailed in our previous work
[19,20,21]. Briefly, an Intel RealSense D435 camera (Intel, Santa
Clara, CA, USA) connected via USB 3.1 was strategically positioned
1.40 m above a one-way exit lane equipped with a stand-on
weighing system to capture top-view video. The camera’s dual
stereo image sensors, with a horizontal field of view of 87° and a
vertical field of view of 58°, enabled depth estimation. Individual
pigs were manually restrained to facilitate the collection of 10–12 s
video segments at a frame rate of 30 frames per second and a
resolution of 1280 × 720. While the pigs exhibited general stability
in their body movements, their heads and tails exhibited a
comparatively dynamic range of motion. Simultaneously with the
video reco