
Methods:
In this Institutional Review Board approved, Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act -compliant, retrospective case-
control study, we evaluated 156 patients with predominantly solid,
non-macroscopic fat containing, enhancing renal masses identified
between June 2009 and June 2016. 110 cases (70%) were
malignant RCC, including clear cell, papillary and chromophobe
subtypes and, 46 cases (30%) were benign renal masses:
oncocytoma and lipid-poor angiomyolipoma. Whole lesions were
manually segmented using Synapse 3D (Fujifilm, CT) and co-
registered from the multiphase CT acquisitions for each tumor.
Pathological diagnosis of all tumors was obtained following surgical
resection. Matlab function, FFT2 was used to perform the image to
frequency transformation.
Results:
A Wilcoxon rank sum test showed that FFT-based metrics were
significantly (p < 0.005) different between 1. benign vs malignant
renal masses, 2. oncocytoma vs clear cell renal cell carcinoma and
3. oncocytoma vs lipid-poor angiomyolipoma. Receiver operator
characteristics analysis revealed reasonable discrimination (area
under the curve >0.7, p < 0.05) within these three groups of
comparisons.
Conclusion:
In combination with other metrics, FFT-metrics may improve
patient management and potentially help differentiate other renal
tumors.
Advances in knowledge:
We report for the first time that FFT-based metrics can differentiate
between some solid, non-macroscopic fat containing, enhancing
renal masses using their contrast-enhanced CT data.
Introduction
The incidental diagnosis of renal masses has increased in the last
decades owing to the widespread use of radiological imaging within
the clinical workflow.1 Multiphase cross-sectional imaging,
including contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) and MRI, is the current
standard in diagnostic and therapeutic imaging for lesion
characterization, staging, surgical planning, and tumor subtype
assessment.2 Apart from lipid-rich angiomyolipomas (lp-AMLs) and
simple or minimally complex cysts, it is difficult to differentiate a
localized renal lesion as benign or malignant or characterize its
subtype based on imaging.3 Quantitative metrics derived from
cross-sectional imaging, including pixel mapping,4 contrast
enhancement pattern analysis,5 chemical shift MRI,6 and histogram
analysis,7, 8 have been studied as potential markers to differentiate
renal lesions. However, to date, none of these metrics been proven
to be a consistent or reliable discriminator as benign and malignant
lesions demonstrate significant overlap in quantitative imaging
characteristics.9, 10 Currently, an invasive procedure, either surgical
resection or percutaneous biopsy, is required to differentiate benign
and malignant solid, non-macroscopic fat containing renal
tumors.11
It is important to differentiate between benign and malignant renal
masses and possibly characterize its subtype, given differences in
prognosis and tumor behavior. Despite these differences, the current
initial treatment of localized benign or malignant lipid poor solid
renal masses is either partial or radical nephrectomy depending on
size and location of the tumor given the difficulty in accurately
diagnosing these lesions in the preoperative setting. If benign
masses can be reliably differentiated from malignant masses
preoperatively, particularly when the size of the tumor is small or
in patients who are poor surgical candidates, this information can
be used in deciding between nephrectomy (partial or radical),
ablative techniques (cryoablation, radiofrequency ablation), or
active surveillance as initial treatment options.12
Texture analysis involves the study of pixel image intensity
variation.13 Within the imaging domain, the image intensities can
be transformed to the frequency components for the purpose of
texture analysis. Extracting latent information that correlates with
tumor behavior (aggressiveness and type) from standard-of-care
images (here, CECT) would be an invaluable tool for physicians to
improve their non-invasive diagnostic accuracy of tumor
classification, particularly without the need for invasive biopsies
and the associated physical and financial burden. Various
mathematical techniques have been developed to quantify image
texture, including statistical, Fourier, and wavelet-based methods
and have been applied to numerous pathologies, such as multiple
sclerosis,14 brain tumors,15 and liver diseases.16 Non-frequency
based textural methods have been reported to produce promising
results in segregating renal tumor types using CECT and
multiparametric MRI.17–21
The purpose of our study is to evaluate the feasibility of using fast
Fourier transform (FFT)-based metrics, to differentiate between
different solid, non-macroscopic fat containing, enhancing renal
masses on preoperative CECT. By design, FFT magnitude captures
the energy captured with the individual frequencies making up the
image and FFT phase captures the positioning of these frequencies.
Here, we used a standard implementation of FFT (FFT2 function in
Matlab®) to extract FFT magnitude and phase, which are present
metrics that capture tumor texture such as complexity index (CI), a
measure of the sum of all the harmonic amplitudes making up a
tumor image. CI provides us an overall metric of the heterogeneity
of texture within the tumor. A larger CI means higher spatial
frequency/textural heterogeneity. Another FFT-based metric is
entropy of the FFT magnitude, which is a measure of the
randomness in the spatial frequency variation. The measure would
capture the transition of texture from high to low frequency and
vice-versa within the tumor. A larger entropy of FFT magnitude
means higher variation in spatial frequency/textural heterogeneity.
Finally, entropy of the FFT phase is an additional frequency-based
metric that measures the randomness in the spatial frequency
variation (phase). The measure would capture the transition of
texture from high to low phase and vice-versa within the tumor.
Larger entropy of FFT phase indicates higher variation in spatial
frequency/ textural heterogeneity. Here, we report the performance
of the FFT-metrics extracted from CECT data in segregating three
groups of comparisons, i.e. 1. benign vs malignant renal masses, 2.
oncocytoma vs clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) and 3.
oncocytoma vs lp-AML.
methods and Materials
Patient data
156 patients with predominantly solid, non-macroscopic fat
containing, enhancing renal masses, 110 cases were malignant renal
cell carcinoma (RCC), including clear cell, papillary and
chromophobe subtypes and, 46 cases were benign renal masses:
oncocytoma, and lp-AML, who underwent partial nephrectomy for
clinically localized disease, were included in this Institutional
Review Board-approved and Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act-compliant study (Table 1) (Figure 1a,b). Patients
were identified by retrospectively querying the prospectively
maintained surgical database for all patients who had pre-operative
multiphase CECT of the abdomen and pelvis between June 2009
and June 2016. Specialized genitourinary pathologists performed
pathologic evaluation of all tumors. In the current study, we
assessed only the primary tumor, and none of the lesions had
intralesional calcifications in the areas assessed. Multicentric
[synchronous] or metachronous RCCs were not included. The
internal morphology of all lesions were predominantly solid. A few
of the lesions (<3%) were described on histopathological
evaluation as having a few areas of necrosis but this was not
quantified. None of them showed necrotic areas on gross radiologic
or pathologic evaluation. In addition, our cohort did not include
predominantly cystic lesions such as Bosniak 3 or Bosniak 4 lesions.
The ccRCC tumors were classified into different grades using the
Fuhrman nuclear grade system (Table 1). The mean and median
tumor size of the ccRCC dataset was 2.79 cm and 2.2 cm
respectively with a standard deviation of 1.36 cm.
Table 1.
Tumor type distribution within the acquired CECT data
Tumor type No. of tumors
Class
Tumor grade
1
2
3
4
ccRCC
70
Malignant 100 5
61 28
6
pRCC
20
chRCC
10
Malignant 10
NA NA NA NA
lpAML
18
Benign 46
NA NA NA NA
Oncocytoma
28
Open in a new tab
Here, ccRCC, clear cell RCC; chRCC, chromophobe RCC; lpAML,
lipid-poor angiomyolipoma; pRCC, papillary RCC and oncocytoma:
renal oncocytoma. Please note that chromophobe RCC, although
malignant is NOT subclassified using Fuhrman grade.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
(a) (Left) Axial nephrographic phase CT image of a heterogeneous
hypodense, exophytic tumor, subsequently proven to be a clear cell
RCC in a 65-year-old male patient. (b) Axial nephrographic phase
CT image of a relatively homogenous, primarily endophytic tumor
in the left renal interpolar region, proven to be an
oncocytoma. RCC, renal cell carcinoma.
CECT settings
CT (Brilliance 64, Philips Healthcare, CT) imaging was performed
using patient breath-holding technique with the following
parameters: 120 kVp, variable tube current, slice thickness of 0.5
mm with reconstruction interval of 2 mm. Post-contrast CT scans
were acquired based on fixed time delay to scanning post-injection
technique for corticomedullary phase images (30 s), nephrographic
phase images (90 s), and excretory phase images (5 min).
Approximately, 100–150 ml of nonionic water soluble intravenous
iodinated contrast Iopamidol (Isovue®−300, Bracco Diagnostics,
Inc, Princeton, NJ, USA) dosed to weight was administered with a
power injector at a rate of 5 ml/s.
Tumor segmentation
Manual segmentation was used to extract the renal tumor contours
and performed by an experienced radiologist in Synapse 3D as
three-dimensional (3D) regions of interest (ROIs).22 Nephrographic
phase provided the best delineation of the tumor, and hence it was
used as the reference template to co-register the other phases. The
series of images were then co-registered using norma