
Methods
A custom marker board incorporating four ArUco markers was
created along with a custom camera holder that mounted onto the
gantry head. OpenCV was utilized to automate tests for couch
translation, collimator and table angles, collimator and table
walkout, optical distance indicator (ODI), and field size detection. A
GUI was created to guide users through the tests, determine passing
status of measurements based on MPPG8.b criteria, and display
image captures to allow users to troubleshoot if needed.
Reproducibility tests were taken across four days. The system was
tested against manual measurements by graph paper or digital level
for each test. Field sizes and ODI were read by 12 different
physicists to determine human variability and comparisons for
CVQA.
Results
The CVQA system took 5 min to set up and 7 min to perform all
tests. All field sizes, collimator/table angles, collimator/table
walkout, and table translations were reproducible within 0.5 mm
and 0.5°. ODI measurements were reproducible within 1 mm. Table
travel, ODI, and walkout measurements agreed with manual
measurements within 0.5 mm and 0.4°, except for vertical table
motions that agreed within 0.9 mm due to the lens focus being
optimized for the 100 cm SSD plane. The standard deviation
between physicists for almost all symmetric and asymmetric jaws
was larger than the reproducibility of CVQA. CVQA has been
utilized for five years and has demonstrated ability to identify
mechanical machine issues.
Conclusions
CVQA successfully automates mechanical QA tasks, providing an
efficient and precise system. CVQA is open source and freely
available for academic institutions. Its adoption can improve
workflow efficiency and consistency in clinical environments.
Keywords: computer vision, mechanical QA, quality assurance
1. INTRODUCTION
Quality assurance (QA) in radiation therapy is a critical component
of ensuring accurate and consistent patient treatments. Modern
linear accelerators (linacs) require extensive monthly mechanical
QA tests as outlined by the American Association of Physicists in
Medicine (AAPM) Task Group 142 (TG‐142) and updated by
Medical Physics Practice Guideline 8.b (MPPG 8.b). 1 , 2 As the tests
have action limits in millimeters, the accuracy should be sub‐
millimeter in order to determine properly if the test is exceeded.
Traditionally, these tests rely on the subjective visual assessment of
physicists, which introduces inter‐ and intra‐user variability and
limits reproducibility. The desired level of accuracy cannot always
be maintained within sub‐millimeter by reliance on the human
visual system. QA tools have been developed using digital sensors to
measure gantry and collimator angle and ODI, 3 but many
mechanical tests still rely on human visual interpretation of features
of the field light.
To overcome these limitations, researchers have explored
automation using computer vision techniques. Jenkins et al. used a
radio luminescent phantom with a gantry‐mounted camera and
were able to automate light field and radiation coincidence, jaw
position, cross‐hair walkout, couch lateral and longitudinal
translations, and laser alignment. 4 However, the phantom was
relatively small so the largest field size used was 10 cm x 10 cm.
Shandiz et al. also used a gantry‐mounted camera and a 3D
phantom similar to Jenkins et al. and were able to automate optical
distance indicator (ODI) and gantry angle. 5 Kim et al. used a
gantry‐mounted smartphone to automate detection of gantry angle,
collimator angle, jaw position, crosshair walkout, and ODI. 6 Unlike
the others, no calibration pattern was used, instead a coin was used
for scaling and internal cell phone sensors such as the gyroscope,
compass, and accelerometer were used for analysis. Due to the
camera field of view, jaw position detection was limited to field
sizes of 30 cm x 30 cm or less. Park et al. differed from these
previous studies and used a couch‐mounted camera to focus on
radiation fields primarily. 7 They were able to automate detection
of linac isocenter, gantry rotation isocenter, collimator rotation
isocenter, couch rotation isocenter, and couch position.
In this study, we developed Computer Vision QA (CVQA), a system
designed to automate various mechanical QA tests, including couch
translation (lateral, longitudinal, and vertical), collimator and table
angles, collimator and table walkout, ODI, and field size detection.
Our system features a graphical user interface (GUI) to facilitate
clinical adoption with minimal training. Unlike previously
published methods, CVQA does not require a separate calibration
plate for each session use and allows measurements of all field
sizes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first device of its
kind to be clinically utilized, which we report on our findings of
utilizing CVQA clinically for 5 years.
2. METHODS
2.1. CVQA system design
We designed a CVQA marker board that was custom manufactured
(Calib.io ApS, Svendborg, Denmark). The CVQA board incorporates
four ArUco markers, crosshair alignment marks, and references for
the gantry and collimator orientations (Figure 1a). The marker
board was designed so that the spacing of the four uniquely coded
ArUco markers does not interfere with the fields being measured.
The ArUco markers are 30 mm square with the outer corners of the
four markers 180 mm apart and centered on the crosshair marks.
ArUco markers have a black border with an inner binary matrix
that is specific to a given identifier. 8 These markers were chosen
instead of the commonly used checkerboard pattern, as they can
provide orientation information as well as on‐line camera
calibration. Collimator and table angles at the cardinal angles
would appear redundant if a standard checkerboard pattern was
used. The CVQA cardinal angle measurements can be distinguished
from each other due to the orientation information provided by the
ArUco markers. The placement of the ArUco markers and alignment
marks was chosen to avoid interference with the field light edges
for the different field sizes measured.
FIGURE 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
CVQA marker board and camera mount. (a) The marker board
designed for the CVQA system, utilizing ArUco markers. (b) The
CVQA camera mount attaches to the interface mount of a Varian
TrueBeam. The CVQA marker board is shown on the table aligned
to the crosshairs.
A CVQA camera mount was developed to attach to the interface
mount of a Varian TrueBeam (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto,
CA), featuring an angled camera assembly optimized for capturing
the entire 40 cm x 40 cm field of view at 100 cm source‐to‐surface
distance (SSD) (Figure 1b). The camera mount and handle were 3D
printed and attached to a TrueBeam interface mount tray via milled
aluminum brackets. The system employs a Blackfly S GigE camera
(FLIR Systems, Wilsonville, OR) with an 8.5 mm fixed focal length
lens (model 58‐000, Edmund Optics, Barrington, New Jersey).
Camera calibration is required during commissioning and after any
change has been made to the aperture or focus adjustments of the
lens. Annual camera calibration is recommended. Accurate
measurements rely on proper aperture and focus setup before
camera calibration. Guidance on setting aperture and focus can be
found in the linked repository. Calibration was performed using a
Calib.io (Calib.io ApS, Svendborg, Denmark) 200 mm x 300 mm
9 × 14 ChArUco (OpenCV 3) (combination of a chessboard and
ArUco) calibration board with 20 mm checkers, 15 mm markers,
and ArUco dictionary DICT_5 × 5. A chessboard is a common
OpenCV pattern. The ChArUco board has the advantage of more
points than a conventional chessboard pattern and it is also robust
to occluded and clipped images. Numerous images at different poses
were acquired to ensure a good camera calibration.
We calibrated the camera while installed in the TrueBeam Interface
Mount just as with normal CVQA operation. We developed a
treatment plan to move the gantry, collimator, and couch to
different positions to create thirty different calibration poses. We
used a calibration utility based on the OpenCV ChArUco camera
calibration example. The result was a calibration file that contains
the camera matrix and distortion coefficients. The focal length
estimates in the camera matrix were fine tuned to produce accurate
measurements for the table height. This was done by using CVQA to
measure field size and couch vertical offsets and adjusting the focal
lengths using trial and error to match a precision setup established
with a front pointer and graph paper. The focal length is adjusted
until the CVQA measurement agrees with the front pointer within
the test tolerance. This tuning is specific to the CVQA device and
must be repeated each time the camera is recalibrated.
The image processing and computer vision measurement functions
were implemented in C++ using the OpenCV library (version 4.1),
which provided general image manipulation tools, computer vision‐
specific functions such as camera calibration, and also access to
ArUco functionality. Images are acquired using our application
programming interface (API), which is based on Flir's Spinnaker
(Teledyne FLIR, Wilsonville, OR) API. Our API has functions to
convert and format the 2448 × 2048 pixel raw image from the
Blackfly camera to an OpenCV Mat of the same resolution.
Perspective transformed images have a resolution of 2000 × 2000
pixels which provides a scale of 0.25 mm per pixel. After
acquisition, the image is processed using our API to apply the
camera calibration and measure image features as described in
section 2.2.
A GUI was created in C++ using Qt (Qt Creator version 4.12.4)
that walks the user through necessary preparatory steps and then
through each test. First, an initialization is performed that warms
up the camera and checks that the ambient light is within the
established bounds. The bottom of the CVQA menu displays the
light level to aid in setup. Next, a referenc