
METHODS
RawConverter can be run in either GUI-based or command line-
based mode. It is implemented by C# using Microsoft Visual Studio
Express 2013 and uses Thermo MSFileReader library to parse RAW
files. RawConverter is freely accessible at http://fields.scripps.edu/
rawconv.
In a DDA experiment, the tandem mass spectrometer selects and
fragments target precursor ions based on abundance. Subsequent
analysis by database searching assumes that the majority of
fragment ions detected in a spectrum come from a single peptide
precursor ion and thus can be matched to a single theoretical
peptide spectrum. Other ionized peptide ions can occur within the
user defined m/z isolation window (typically ±1 Da) and also be
fragmented, but the small window size will limit the frequency of
this occurrence.13,14 In contrast, in a DIA experiment all precursor
ions within a wider isolation window (e.g., ±10 Da) are
fragmented and detected as a mixed spectrum. Our assumption is
that, in most cases, a more abundant peptide ion in an isolation
window generates the dominant and more abundant fragment ions,
although this assumption does not consider peptide related
fragmentation efficiency. Based on this assumption, RawConverter
is designed to accurately report information about the most
abundant precursor ions in an isolation window. For DDA data, the
m/z value of the precursor ion is corrected, and for DIA data, the
m/z values and charge states of all abundant precursor ions in the
isolation window are reported for a single MS/MS spectrum.
Precursor peptide ions are recognized in an isolation window using
two steps: (i) isotopic envelopes are constructed for all possible
charge states for each peak, and (ii) each isotopic envelope is
evaluated to filter out impossible matches. RawConverter generates
all possible isotopic envelopes based on the observed m/z values
and possible charge states (instrument-provided charge state in
DDA data extraction and charge 1 to 6 in DIA data extraction in our
experiments). The maximum monoisotopic precursor mass in the
isotopic envelope construction is 8 kDa. The selection of this preset
mass threshold is because above 8,000 Da the monoisotopic peak
cannot be identified due to its negligible abundance according to
the averagine lookup table,9 and RawConverter is not designed to
retrieve peaks not present in the spectra. This also stays within the
limits of typical bottom-up MS/MS-based shotgun proteomics
experiment, where generating peptides larger than 8 kDa is unlikely
and a threshold of 6 kDa is frequently used as the maximum peptide
mass in database searches.
The evaluation of isotopic envelopes can be treated as a linear
programming problem. Let E be the set of envelopes, Ei ∈ E the ith
envelope, and Eji the jth peak in envelope Ei. Let P be the set of
peaks in the isolation window and Pi ∈ P be the ith peak. We define
two functions, mz(·) and h(·), to get the m/z value and the intensity
of a given peak, respectively. We use wi to denote the weight of
envelope Ei and ε to measure the difference between the theoretical
and observed peak intensity. Then the isotopic envelope evaluation
problem can be represented as following:
Minimize:∑iεiSubjectto:∑mz(Ekj)=mz(Pi)wjh(Ekj)-
εi≤h(Pi)∑mz(Ekj)=mz(Pi)wjh(Ekj)+εi≥h(Pi)wj≥0εi≥0
A weighted value is reported for each envelope by solving this
linear programming problem. The peak intensities in each envelope
are recalculated according to these weight values. Each envelope
contains all possible isotopic peaks and the distribution of these
intensities is called an observed isotope distribution (Eobsv). From
the averagine lookup table,9 a theoretical isotope distribution
(Etheo) can be retrieved using the mass of the target peptide. Two
distributions are compared to calculate a distribution similarity
score using Eq. (1):
S(Eobsv,Etheo)=Imono(Eobsv)·Scos_sim(Eobsv,Etheo)D(Eobsv,Etheo)
(1)
Scos_sim(Eobsv,Etheo)=∑i(Eobsvi·Etheoi)∑i(Eobsvi)2·∑i(Etheoi)2(2)
D(Eobsv,Etheo)=∑i(Eobsvi-Etheoi)2∑i(Etheoi)2 (3)
where Imono(Eobsv) is the log-relative intensity of the first peak in
Eobsv, Eobsvi denotes the intensity of the ith peak in Eobsv, and Etheoi
denotes the intensity of the ith peak in Etheo.
For DDA data, the observed envelope with the top similarity score
relative to the theoretical one is considered to be the correct
envelope and its first peak is selected as the monoisotopic peak. To
improve accuracy, we also apply the same approach on the previous
and next MS scans. The envelope selected at least twice from these
three MS scans will be used to report the monoisotopic precursor
information. For DIA data, the observed envelopes with top N
similarity scores are selected and their corresponding monoisotopic
m/z values and charge states are reported as precursor information
of the given tandem mass spectrum. RawConverter dynamically
determines the value of N according to the width of the isolation
window.
RESULTS
RawConverter provides three types of conversions: (i) conversion of
binary Thermo Fisher RAW files to text-based files in the form of
MS1/MS2/MS3, MGF, or mzXML format, (ii) conversion of mzML
or mzXML files to MS1/MS2/MS3 or MGF files, and (iii) conversion
between MGF files and MS2 files. The resulting text-based files can
be submitted directly to most current database search and de novo
sequencing software tools. We evaluated the performance of
RawConverter in two experiments, one that evaluated monoisotopic
peak selection for DDA data and the other that evaluated precursor
prediction for DIA data.
1. Evaluation of Monoisotopic Peak Selection for DDA
Data
We compared RawConverter with RawXtract v1.9.9.2 1, pXtract
v2.0 (with pParse 3), and ProteoWizard v3.0.7162 2. Since
RawXtract cannot select monoisotopic peaks in data extraction, it
was used as the baseline in the comparison. These four extraction
tools were applied to a RAW file generated from a Thermo Velos
LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Briefly, 10 ug of HEK293T cells
were digested with trypsin after reduction and alkylation with
iodoacetamide. The resulting peptides were separated and analyzed
by MudPIT 15 and a single salt fraction was used for comparison of
extraction tools. All programs extracted a total of 37532 tandem
mass spectra and each set was searched against the UniProt 16
human protein database using IP2.17 The database search tools in
IP2, ProLuCID 18 and DTASelect 2 19, are used to process the search
results. The precursor and fragment error tolerance were set as 50
ppm and 600 ppm, respectively. Semi-tryptic peptides with one
missed-cleavage site were considered. Carbami-domethylation (Cys)
was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (Met) and deamidation
(Asn and Gln) were set as variable modifications, and at most one
variable modification was allowed for each peptide. We used the
target-decoy database search strategy to control the false discovery
rate (FDR) and the FDR threshold was set as 1% at the peptide-
