
Methods
We aimed to extend the previously described Grinsted wavelet
package with rectified bias of power and transfer function gain
estimation of cerebral autoregulation assessment. The algorithm
was validated in simulated signals and data of five healthy male
subjects undergoing a protocol to produce large changes in
hemodynamics by using lower body positive pressure (LBNP) with
mild hypoxia and lower body negative pressure (LBNP). We
intended to compare wavelet-based observations with FFT-based
estimates.
Results
We found good agreement between wavelet and FFT-based
coherence and gain of cerebral tissue oxygenation index, in Bland
Altman Plot and linear correlations for repeated measurement
especially in the low frequency range (0.04 -0.15 Hz, coherence: r
= 0.69, p < 0.001, gain: r = 0.74, p = 0.001), but was less in the
very low frequency range (≤0.04 Hz, coherence: r = 0.65, p <
0.001, gain: r = 0.66, p < 0.001) and high frequency range
(0.15-0.4 Hz, coherence: r = 0.39, p < 0.001, gain: r = 0.71, p =
0.001). FFT-based coherence was smaller than wavelet estimates for
values <0.5.
Discussion
We demonstrated good agreement in power, coherence, transfer
function gain estimates between FFT-based method and our
modified wavelet method. This was confirmed in simulated data
and in healthy subjects undergoing LBNP and LBPP with hypoxia.
Near-infrared spectroscopy-derived wavelet transform could be
useful for exploring cerebral autoregulation dynamics, especially in
non-stationary data.
Keywords: cerebral autoregulation, transfer function analysis,
wavelet, lower body negative pressure, lower body positive pressure
Introduction
Cerebral autoregulation is an important characteristic of the
cerebral vasculature to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion even
in the presence of changing arterial driving pressure. The concept,
originally introduced by Lassen, suggests a stable plateau on the
autoregulation curve beyond which cerebral blood flow becomes
pressure passive, potentially leading to damage by over- or
underperfusion of the brain (Lassen, 1959; Lassen and Christensen,
1976). Apart from exceeding the limits of cerebral autoregulation,
certain diseases can also affect autoregulation integrity with an
increased risk of cerebrovascular events leading to unfavorable
outcome (Thudium et al., 2024; Soehle et al., 2004).
Several methods of data integration and processing with other
cardiovascular parameters have been proposed to allow insights
into cerebral autoregulation properties. With an increased use of
near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) as a surrogate parameter for
cerebral blood flow, time domain parameters like moving
correlation coefficients have been employed to describe the linear
relationship between NIRS and mean arterial blood pressure (MBP).
A cerebral oxygenation index (COx) has been introduced
implementing a moving Pearson correlation coefficient between
NIRS saturation and arterial blood pressure similar to the original
mean velocity index (Mx) which is based on the correlation
between transcranial Doppler sonography and MBP. These indices
have been used on many occasions, and have even been used in
clinical settings (Soehle et al., 2004; Brady et al., 2010; Joshi et al.,
2012; Laflam et al., 2015). Time domain methods can observe
changes over time but are limited to observe changes in a certain
frequency ranges like rapid or slower fluctuations. Frequency
domain methods based on Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) describe
the phase relationship, gain and the transfer function between MBP
as an input and NIRS as an output signal. These methods can be
used to describe autoregulation properties in a wide range of
frequencies. Coherence analyses in the frequency-domain have been
utilized to estimate autoregulatory properties especially in the very
low frequency range (VLF: ≤0.04 Hz) (Brady et al., 2010).
However, FFT based coherence analysis requires stationary data and
its time-frequency resolution is not optimized.
Continuous wavelet transform (CWT) and wavelet coherence have
been introduced in cerebral autoregulation assessment (Tian et al.,
2016; Cui et al., 2014). The wavelet method convolutes a time-
domain signal with a selected scaled and sliding mother wavelet, in
contrast to fixed time windows of the FFT-based method. The scaled
wavelet alleviates the time resolution limitation, while the sliding
wavelet overcomes the request of stationarity (Grinsted et al.,
2004). Tian et al. applied continuous wavelet coherence in pediatric
patients successfully. They demonstrated that in-phase and anti-
phase coherences are related to worse clinical outcome (Tian et al.,
2016). However, observed changes were over long periods from 80
min to 2.5 h. Cui et al. found age related differences in coherence
and phase between elderly and young subjects using wavelet
coherence analysis in higher frequency range (Cui et al., 2014). This
demonstrates the importance to study also faster oscillations to
characterize dynamic cerebral autoregulation.
More recent concepts of cerebral autoregulation suggest a rather
mild sloped region instead of a completely flat plateau in the
autoregulation curve as originally proposed by Lassen (Lassen,
1959; Brassard et al., 2021). This may lead to a difficult distinction
between intact and impaired cerebral autoregulation when using
COx or Mx calculations using correlation coefficients since a certain
degree of correlation does not always imply disturbed
autoregulation. Additionally, there is local and neural mediated
vasomotion causing periodicities with low frequency oscillations
(LF: 0.04 – 0.15 Hz, periodicities between 10 and 20 s) in the
cardiovascular system which have not been studied fully as a
separate entity in dynamic cerebral blood flow. Moving correlation
coefficients process the signal over the whole frequency range and
cannot distinguish LF oscillations from other changes in
hemodynamics. FFT based coherence analysis allows to study LF
oscillations but cannot be applied to short non-stationary data. The
continuous wavelet transform allows to estimate coherence with
optimal frequency and temporal resolution. Using only coherence
cannot estimate the damping magnitude of external blood pressure
disturbances on cerebral blood circulation. In this context, transfer
function analysis can be employed to estimate gain and phase
relationship between these two signals. The wavelet package by
Grinsted introduced coherence analysis of geophysical time series
has not implemented and validated transfer function estimates.
Additionally, distorted wavelet spectral power has been reported
and needs to be corrected in the algorithm (Grinsted et al., 2004;
Liu et al., 2007).
Our objective was to extend the Grinsted wavelet package with a
transfer function analysis with rectified estimation of power and
validated transfer function gain applicable for assessment of
dynamic cerebral autoregulation. We hypothesized that wavelet
transfer function gain can be used to detect dynamic hemodynamic
changes in the cerebral circulation under extreme conditions. We
intended to test if 1) the modified wavelet transfer function delivers
similar results compared to FFT-based method 2) cerebral tissue
oxygenation by near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and cerebral
blood velocity by transcranial Doppler (TCD) results reflect
impaired cerebral autoregulation as compared to baseline
measurements. To be suitable for application in dynamic clinical
settings, we intended to focus especially on the LF range which is
under the control of autonomic nervous system.
In order to test the validity of the wavelet package in conjunction
with NIRS monitoring, it was necessary to observe a wide range of
hemodynamic states, possibly exceeding the limits of the
autoregulatory plateau as originally described by Lassen (Lassen,
1959). Therefore, we intended to use incremental lower body
negative pressure (LBNP) to reduce cardiac preload. For
hyperdynamic states, we aimed to use increased cardiac preload
with incremental lower body positive pressure (LBPP) with added
mild hypoxia on the last pressure level. Hypoxia has previously
been reported to be associated with impaired cerebral
autoregulation (Ainslie et al., 2008).
The aim of this pilot study was to validate wavelet transfer function
algorithm with surrogate data and during a wide range of cerebral
blood flow disturbances, induced by lower body negative or
positive pressure and additional hypoxia, in a homogenous group of
young healthy male subjects with intact cerebral autoregulation in
order to receive uniform cerebrovascular responses to adequately
observe differences between intact and impaired cerebral
autoregulation.
Materials and methods
LBNP and LBPP and additional hypoxia protocols were used to
modulate blood pressure fluctuations and cerebrovascular response
in healthy subjects. The protocol was approved by the ethics
committee of the chamber of physicians North-Rhine, Duesseldorf,
Germany (Chair: Prof. K. Racké, No 2018246). A signed informed
consent was obtained for all subjects before participation.
Enrollment
Subjects were enrolled after medical examination and confirmation
of healthy status. Inclusion criteria were healthy, male subjects of
age 18-30 years. Exclusion criteria were arterial hypertension, any
type of regular medication, and cerebrovascular malformations.
