
Methods:
The study included 15 patients who underwent hip arthroscopy
between March 2024 and November 2024 as well as a healthy
control group of 15 participants, matched to the patients by sex,
age, and body mass index, recruited from the community. All
participants performed the single-leg squat (SLS), and kinematic
data were collected using an 8-camera motion capture system. One-
way analysis of variance was used to compare baseline, 3-month
postoperative, and 6-month postoperative kinematic data of the
FAIS group with those of the healthy control group. Post hoc
comparisons were conducted using the Tukey test to determine
between-group differences. Correlation analysis was performed to
assess the relationship between changes in the hip flexion angle and
changes in iHOT-33 and HAGOS-Sport scores.
Results:
At 3 months postoperatively, the involved limb hip flexion angle (P
= .021), hip adduction angle (P = .0011), knee flexion angle (P =
.016), and change in the center of mass (P = .0034) were reduced
compared with the healthy control group. At 6 months
postoperatively, no significant kinematic differences were observed
between the FAIS and healthy control groups. Correlations between
changes in the iHOT-33 score at 3 months and changes in the hip
flexion angle at 6 months were positive (r = 0.64; P = .0094), and
changes in the iHOT-33 score at 6 months were also positively
correlated with changes in the hip flexion angle at 6 months (r =
0.53; P = .041).
Conclusion:
Patients with FAIS exhibited abnormal kinematics during the SLS at
3 months postoperatively, which showed improvement by 6
months. Furthermore, improvement in sagittal-plane angles of the
hip at 6 months postoperatively was correlated with the iHOT-33
score, supporting our hypothesis. Clinicians should not overlook
functional recovery after hip arthroscopy for FAIS.
Keywords: femoroacetabular impingement syndrome, hip
arthroscopy, single-leg squat, kinematics, clinical outcomes
Femoroacetabular impingement syndrome (FAIS) is a morphological
abnormality of the hip joint, commonly observed in young,
physically active adults.1,2,10,28 It is typically characterized by a
triad of symptoms, clinical signs, and radiographic findings. 12
Corrective surgery for FAIS is typically performed arthroscopically
to restore the normal femoral head-neck offset. 14
Some studies8,20 have reported that 3 months postoperatively
represents an early time point at which patients with FAIS typically
demonstrate the bulk of clinically meaningful improvement, while 6
months corresponds to an important midterm stage for recovery
and return to sport. The single-leg squat (SLS) is an effective task
for clinical assessments, biomechanical investigations, and
evaluations of athletic performance. 11 Compared with the double-
leg squat, the SLS imposes greater demands on stability and motor
control, elicits more multiplanar (particularly frontal-plane)
kinematic deviations, provokes stronger unilateral muscle
activation, and exhibits higher clinical sensitivity; consequently, in
postoperative functional assessments and rehabilitation, the SLS can
detect unilateral deficits and compensatory strategies earlier and
more precisely. 5 Motion capture analysis can accurately
characterize the impact of FAIS on hip function during activities of
daily living.6,17,19,27 Therefore, preoperative and early
postoperative motion capture assessments of SLS kinematics in
patients with FAIS can improve our understanding of their
functional status and provide an evidence-based foundation for
early rehabilitation. A previous study reported that, after hip
arthroscopy at 9 months, patients with FAIS demonstrated a
significant increase in sagittal-plane range of motion of the hip
during the SLS. 16 Similarly, there was a significant increase in
sagittal-plane range of motion of the knee in patients with FAIS
postoperatively. Furthermore, the changes in angles were
significantly correlated with Hip Outcome Score–Sports Subscale
and Hip Outcome Score–Activities of Daily Living scores. 16
However, there remains a lack of data on clinical scores and
functional performance during the early recovery period after hip
arthroscopy for FAIS.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to assess continuous changes in
the kinematics of the involved and uninvolved lower limbs in
patients with FAIS at 3 and 6 months after hip arthroscopy as well
as to examine the correlations between changes in hip flexion
angles and changes in International Hip Outcome Tool–33
(iHOT-33) and Copenhagen Hip and Groin Outcome Score Sport
subscale (HAGOS-Sport) scores. It was hypothesized that abnormal
kinematic patterns would be observed during the SLS at 3 months
postoperatively, with significant improvements by 6 months,
reaching levels comparable to those of a healthy control group.
Furthermore, changes in sagittal-plane hip angles were expected to
be associated with improvements in both iHOT-33 and HAGOS-
Sport scores.
Methods
Participants
After institutional review board approval, patients who underwent
hip arthroscopy from March 2024 to November 2024 at our
institute were selected for SLS analysis. The inclusion criteria
comprised patients aged 18 to 50 years who were diagnosed with
FAIS based on clinical symptoms and radiographic findings. 12 The
exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) previous lower limb surgery;
(2) concomitant hip conditions, including hip osteoarthritis with
Tönnis grade >1, avascular necrosis, Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease,
osteoid osteoma, synovial chondromatosis, pigmented villonodular
synovitis, and developmental dysplasia of the hip (lateral center
edge angle <18°); (3) lower extremity injuries within the past
month; (4) other forms of arthritis, diabetes, or heart disease that
limit daily activities; and (5) refusal to participate in follow-up.
Ultimately, 15 patients with FAIS were enrolled in the study. All
patients were asked to return to our clinic for follow-up at 3 and 6
months postoperatively, where they underwent motion capture
testing. Participants of the healthy control group were recruited
from the university community and matched with patients for sex,
age, and body mass index.
Data Collection
Patient characteristics, including age at surgery, sex, affected side,
height, weight, body mass index, and duration of symptoms, were
recorded. Radiographic examinations were performed
preoperatively to obtain the alpha angle in the Dunn view, the
lateral center edge angle in the anteroposterior view, and the
Tönnis grade in the anteroposterior view, as described in previous
studies.18,22,23
Patient-reported outcome measures, including the iHOT-33 and
HAGOS-Sport, were used to assess hip function.4,7,13 iHOT-33 and
HAGOS-Sport scores were routinely collected preoperatively and at
3 and 6 months postoperatively via telephone or during outpatient
visits. In addition, kinematic data collected included peak hip
flexion angle, peak hip adduction angle, peak knee flexion angle,
and change in the center of mass (ΔCOM) of the involved and
uninvolved limbs during the SLS.
SLS Task
All participants were required to wear fitted swimming trunks and
remain barefoot during testing. A total of 37 reflective markers
were attached to the participants, which were placed on the lateral
and medial malleoli, heel, midpoint of the second
metatarsophalangeal joint, first metatarsophalangeal joint, fifth
metatarsophalangeal joint, lower one-third and upper one-third of
the tibia, lateral lower one-third of the leg, tibial tuberosity, medial
and lateral femoral condyles, anterior thigh, lateral thigh, anterior
superior iliac spine, posterior superior iliac spine, highest point of
the iliac crest, acromion, and right scapula. All participants were
marked by the same examiner to ensure that the testing results
were not affected by interrater variability. All SLS tasks were
performed at a self-selected speed to better reflect movements in a
clinical setting. Participants were instructed to “squat as low as
possible while maintaining full contact between your foot and the
force plate at all times.” No depth targets were used. A
familiarization session was provided before data collection, which
included a demonstration of the task by the researcher. Participants
completed 3 practice trials before data collection commenced. 21
Kinematic parameters of the lower limbs during the SLS were
obtained via an 8-camera infrared high-speed motion capture
system (Nexus T40; Vicon) at a sampling frequency of 100 Hz
(Figure 1).
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Demonstration of the single-leg squat.
Surgical Technique
Primary hip arthroscopy was performed by a fellowship-trained
surgeon (Y.X.) with over 10 years of experience in hip arthroscopy
using the standard supine approach described in previous studies. 24
After anesthesia and traction, the anterolateral, anterior, and
midanterior portals were established. A thorough examination of
the central compartment was conducted through capsulotomy
between the portals to assess the acetabular rim, acetabular labrum,
articular cartilage, and ligaments. After the examination,
synovectomy was performed on the inflamed synovium.
Acetabuloplasty was carried out for pincer deformities. If a labral
tear was observed, labral repair was performed using a multiple
suture anchor technique if remaining fibrous tissue was sufficient to
restore the sealing function of the labrum. If remaining fibrous
tissue was of poor quality or insufficient to restore the sealing
function, labral reconstruction was performed using an autologous
iliotibial band. Additionally, chondroplasty was performed for
partial-thickness chondral lesions and cartilage flaps. After treating
the central compartment, the arthroscope was moved to the
peripheral compartment, where femoroplasty was performed to
address cam deformities. Finally, the capsule was routinely
repaired.
Rehabilitation Protocol
All patients followed the same instructions for 