
METHODS
In the following section, we define the underlying probabilistic
graphical model used to describe the protein inference problem
including all of its conditional dependencies. Then, we present the
inference algorithm, which allows one to efficiently calculate
probabilities for peptides, proteins, and protein groups. In addition,
we provide information on the pre- and postprocessing of the data.
Model
The model we chose for protein inference is based on a Bayesian
network (BN) representation. The protein–peptide graph (Figure 1)
encodes the conditional dependencies of proteins and their
peptides. The advantage of this specification of conditional
(in-)dependencies is the resulting factorization of the high-
dimensional joint distribution into smaller distributions, namely,
prior distributions for the proteins and conditional probability
distributions (CPDs) for the peptides given their parents. In the case
of the binary representation for every peptide and protein, these
distributions are discrete and correspond to conditional probability
tables (CPTs).
Additionally, the Bayesian network needs to be para-metrized.
Although the factorization into smaller distributions decreases the
number of parameters, each CPT still needs 2p parameters, where p
is the number of parent nodes, to be set or learned. By recognizing
the fact that in the generative process from proteins to peptides the
presence of any of the parent proteins is enough to potentially
produce a peptide, we can reduce the number of parameters further
when specifying the conditional probability according to a noisy-OR
model.13 In its original form, the network using the noisy-OR model
requires the following parameters:
•  γρ prior for protein with index ρ
•  αρ,ε noisy-OR emission probability of a protein ρ generating
peptide ε and
•  βε noisy-OR leak probability for a peptide ε being generated
by chance.
For now, we employ the same simplification used in the Fido10
algorithm by assuming equality among all α and the presence of
only one β. Additionally, a constant prior γ for all proteins prevents
biases on the protein level when no further information is available.
The parameters α, β, and γ either have to be specified manually or
are by default selected from a grid of initial values based on target-
decoy classification performance and probability calibration (see
the Implementation subsection for details).
One addition to the original model is an option to add prior
probabilities for the random variables (RVs) that model the number
of proteins that might produce a certain shared peptide. These
priors were designed empirically to decrease with a rising number
of present parents. In the course of inference, this results in a form
of regularization on the number of parent proteins and a more
uneven distribution of the evidence from shared peptides starting at
the most likely producing proteins (based on their beliefs from the
rest of the network), especially in conjunction with the so-called
max-product inference. For a more detailed description of the
parameterization including equations and an example, please refer
to the Supplementary Methods (Section 25.1).
Algorithm
Once the protein inference problem is modelled as a (factorized)
probability distribution, probabilities can be inferred on random
variables of interest. Usually, probabilities of interest are the
marginal probabilities of proteins, protein groups, or peptides,
given the evidence on the PSM level, the so-called posterior
probabilities.
As peptide-level evidence, the algorithm first reads the PSM
probabilities and the associations with their parent proteins from
spectra searched with a peptide search engine. It then aggregates
PSM probabilities at the peptide level by picking the maximum PSM
probability per unmodified peptide sequence and filters out
peptides with extremely small probabilities (e.g., below 0.001).
A naive approach to inference in a Bayesian network would be to
create a large joint probability table for each connected component
of the network and marginalize each protein by aggregating the
probabilities of all possible configurations leading to the same state
of the current protein of interest. To make this approach viable for
at least small to medium-sized problems, previous tools resorted to
(Gibbs) sampling11 or sped up calculations by caching results and
