
Methods
Dataset
The data analyzed stem from a dataset (Tsuji et al., 2025) collected
using Children Helping Science (Scott & Schulz, 2017), a platform
specialized in collecting experimental infant gaze data from
webcams. Infants between 1 and 12 months of age with a
gestational age of over 37 weeks were recruited on the same
platform. Legal guardians gave informed consent by reading the on-
screen explanations and reading aloud their consent while being
video-recorded. They received a $5 gift voucher for study
completion. The study protocol was approved by the Life Science
Research Ethics and Safety committee at the University of Tokyo
(Approval No. 24–593). The dataset comprised participants for
which the video recording was complete and included stimulus
sounds in which human annotations had been made, all gaze
classifiers functioned without errors, and data such as experimental
settings and timestamps were properly aligned without technical
issues (N = 47, 23 girls, Mage = 257.43 days, SD = 103.55, range = 
67–392). A further 15 infants were excluded because of technical
errors (N = 13) or extensive fussiness (N = 2).
Infants participated in a visual preference task, in which they were
exposed to black-and-white visual stimuli (see Fig. 1). Following
Teller (1979), in each trial, either one stimulus was presented to the
left or right of the screen (eight trials), or two stimuli were
presented, one on each side of the screen (four trials). Each of the
resulting 12 trials lasted for 20 s and was preceded by a 5-s central,
colorful attention-getter stimulus accompanied by a chime-like
sound. Within the two presentation types, we varied stimulus
movement (static, dynamic) and complexity (low, high). The trial
order was randomized. Between subjects, we varied stimulus shape
(squares, circles) and whether there was background music present
during the experiment.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Example trial displays (black-and-white visual stimuli). Notes. Left:
Pairwise presented high-complexity circles (red arrow symbolizes
dynamic stimulus). Right: Low-complexity circle presented on one
side of the screen
Although the experimental software provided information on trial
onset and other timing parameters, they did not account for delays
caused by internet transmission. Therefore, to correct the onset time
of each trial, we automatically detected the onset and offset of an
attention-getter that preceded each trial, through its sound as
recorded through the webcam. Human annotators checked and
corrected this automatic detection. Infant gaze directions during
each trial were coded by trained human annotators into five
categories: Center, Left, Right, Away, and Unsure. Frames labeled as
unsure were excluded from subsequent analyses, as these frames
were considered difficult to judge even for human annotators (7.5%
of all frames). In addition, frames labeled as Center were removed
when calculating agreement scores, because the gaze classifiers
evaluated in this study do not output a Center label. Center frames
accounted for only 6.1% of all frames, so their exclusion is unlikely
to affect the results. Note that these exclusions were applied only to
the dependent-variable side (i.e., the computation of accuracy
metrics); for the quantification of noise factors described below, we
used all frames from which relevant information could be extracted.
To assess the reliability of human annotations, we calculated the
agreement between two trained annotators for a subset of data
consisting of four participants (8.5% of the dataset, 47 trials). On
average, the agreement rate was very high (M = 95.9%, SD = 5.4),
ensuring that human annotations could be regarded as ground
truth.
Automated gaze classifiers
In this study, we used three state-of-the-art gaze classifiers tailored
to infant looking-time experiments. Infant gaze classification for
evaluation of experimental results commonly requires classification
into two or three categories. In the case of two categories, the
classification is between cases where the infant’s gaze is “on” or
“off” screen, which is often used as a marker of general interest in
the content of the screen display. In the case of three categories, the
“on” category is further divided into “left” and “right” as an
indicator of a preference for the content shown on the respective
side of the screen. Unless otherwise specified, we used the default
hyperparameter settings for each classifier.
iCatcher+. On the video datasets, we ran iCatcher+ v0.2.0 (Erel et
al., 2023; https://github.com/icatcherplus/icatcher_plus/releases/
tag/0.2.0), rooted in computer vision methods and developed
especially for detecting gaze from infant online experiments.
iCatcher+ was developed based on iCatcher (Erel et al., 2022), an
automated gaze classifier specifically designed for research with
infants and young children. iCatcher+ was reported to achieve
accurate and robust gaze classification on new datasets (> 80%,
Erel et al., 2023; Luchkina et al., 2025) by being trained on
substantially varied datasets in terms of experimental settings
(online, in-lab, and outside of the lab), research topics (intuitive
physics, language comprehension), infant age, and ethnicity.
iCatcher+ consists of three components: the face detector, face
classifier, and gaze classifier. The face detector extracts areas that
possibly include faces using OpenCV (Bradski, 2000), which was
not specifically tuned toward infant face detection. Candidate areas
are then fed into the face classifier. This determines whether the
area is an infant’s or adult’s face and selects which of the candidate
areas is most likely to belong to the participant. The gaze classifier
then predicts gaze direction (i.e., Left, Right, and Away). It
produces this result for the temporal middle frame within the
moving window of five consecutive frames. If no face is found, the
model returns a label of Invalid.
OWLET. This online webcam-linked eye-tracker (Werchan et al.,
2022) is an open-source tool for automatically estimating infants’
gaze coordinates on a monitor based on smartphone and webcam
recordings. High correlation coefficients of over .95 were reported
between OWLET–human annotations in terms of overall looking
time, maximum looking duration, and the number of gaze shifts.
OWLET consists of three components: infants’ face/eye/pupil
detector, gaze direction estimator, and estimator of point-to-gaze on
the screen. The first component extracts infants’ face/gaze/pupil
frame-by-frame using OpenCV (Bradski, 2000) and the Dlib
Machine Learning Toolkit (King, 2009). If more than one face is
