
Methods
The Knee Pain and related health In the Community (KPIC) cohort
comprises community-derived adults aged ≥40 years, irrespective
of knee pain. Thirty-six comorbidities across 10 systems were
compared between people with KP and controls without KP or knee
OA. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was used to determine
the adjusted odds ratio (aOR) and 95% CI for multimorbidity (at
least two chronic conditions) and each specific comorbidity. Both
prescribed and over-the-counter analgesics were included in the
model, and their interactions with KP for comorbidity outcomes
were examined.
Results
Two thousand eight hundred and thirty-two cases with KP and 2518
controls were selected from 9506 baseline participants. The mean
age of KP cases was 62.2 years, and 57% were women. Overall, 29%
of the total study population had multimorbidity (KP cases 34.4%;
controls 23.8%). After adjustment for age, sex, BMI and analgesic
use, KP was significantly associated with multimorbidity (aOR 1.35;
95% CI 1.17, 1.56) and with cardiovascular (aOR 1.25; 95% CI
1.08, 1.44), gastrointestinal (aOR 1.34; 95% CI 1.04, 1.92), chronic
widespread pain (aOR 1.54; 95% CI 1.29, 1.86) and neurological
(aOR 1.32; 95% CI 1.01, 1.76) comorbidities. For multimorbidity,
the use of paracetamol and opioids interacted positively with KP,
whereas the use of NSAIDs interacted negatively for seven
comorbidities.
Conclusion
People with KP are more likely to have other chronic conditions.
The long-term benefits and harms of this change remain to be
investigated.
Trial registration
ClinicalTrials.gov, http://clinicaltrials.gov, NCT02098070.
Keywords: OA, comorbidity, community survey, NSAIDs,
paracetamol, opioids, interaction
Key messages
•  People with knee pain have increased association with
multiple chronic conditions and other comorbidities.
•  Use of paracetamol and opioids for knee pain is strongly
associated with other chronic conditions.
•  However, association of the use of NSAIDs with comorbidities
was less evident.
Introduction
Knee pain (KP) is one of the major reported musculoskeletal
problems worldwide [1], and in middle-aged and older people it is
commonly associated with knee OA [2]. According to a recent
systematic review, one in five people aged ≥40 years around the
world have knee OA [3]. The burden of KP increases with age and
contributes to functional decline and disability [4–6]. Like KP,
many other chronic conditions are more likely to occur in later life
[5–8].
A recent systematic review reported that 67% of people with any
OA have at least one other chronic condition [9]. Comorbidity (the
presence of any other condition with an index disease) research in
KP has focused mainly on chronic widespread pain [10] or
psychological problems [11]; however, recent studies have shown
that the risks of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, upper
gastrointestinal and psychological conditions also are increased in
people with KP or OA [12, 13]. This is supported by a retrospective
cohort study in the UK in people aged >20 years, which reported
that 53% of people with OA had at least two comorbidities at the
time of OA diagnosis [14]. Comorbidities in KP are associated with
worse pain, more physical disability [15] and increased risk of
mortality [16, 17]. Also, they can influence treatment options, both
pharmacological and non-pharmacological, and complicate shared
management decision-making [18–20]. The increased number of
comorbidities in KP can also influence the choice and outcomes of
knee replacement surgery [21].
Ageing, obesity, movement restriction, pathophysiological changes
and analgesic drug intake might all contribute to development of
comorbidities in KP. However, current evidence is often prone to
selection bias [9]. For example, medical record-based studies do not
capture individuals in the general population who do not consult
for health-care advice and also lack information on use of non-
prescribed medications, such as over-the-counter (self-purchased)
analgesics [22]. Such information is crucial in understanding the
true burden of comorbidities in KP. Therefore, we used community
survey data to explore comorbidities in KP. The aims of this study
were to identify the association of KP with other chronic conditions
and to examine the use of oral analgesics in people with KP and
comorbidities.
Methods
We used baseline data from the Nottingham Knee Pain and related
health In the Community (KPIC) study, a prospective cohort study
in the East Midlands region of the UK, which began in 2014 [23].
The study was approved by the Nottingham Research Ethics
Committee 1 (NREC reference 14/EM/0015) and registered with
ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02098070). All written informed consent
forms were stored safely and securely in Academic Rheumatology,
Nottingham City Hospital.
Study design and population
This was a cross-sectional study using baseline questionnaire data of
KPIC. At baseline, 40 505 questionnaires were mailed to all men and
women aged ≥40 years, irrespective of knee pain status, who were
registered with 12 participating general practices in the East
Midlands area. Exclusion criteria were inability to give informed
consent, terminal illness or severe mental illness [18]. The
questionnaire was accompanied by a covering letter from each
person’s general practitioner introducing the study and its
objectives. Return of a completed questionnaire in a pre-paid
envelope to Academic Rheumatology (City Hospital, Nottingham)
was taken as implicit consent. Completed questionnaires were
returned by 9506 individuals (23% response rate). Full details of
the KPIC study have been published elsewhere [23].
For the present study, KP was defined as either chronic knee pain or
physician-diagnosed knee OA (KOA). KP was defined using a self-
reported question: ‘Have you experienced pain in or around a knee
on most days of the last month and has your current knee pain
lasted more than 3 months?’. Clinically, chronic KP in people >40 
years old has shown congruity with KOA [24]. KOA was defined as
any person reporting physician-diagnosed KOA who answered, ‘Yes’
to the question: ‘Have you ever been diagnosed by your doctor as
having osteoarthritis of the knee?’. Individuals were required to
have positive responses to either of these two questions for
inclusion in the KP/KOA case group. The reason that KPIC focused
on knee pain rather than OA is because knee pain is the malady,
and radiographic OA is a risk factor for pain rather than an
important disease. The findings are likely to be relevant to KOA,
given that most chronic knee pain in people >40 years old is
associated with OA.
We selected all the eligible people with neither KP nor KOA from
the KPIC database as controls. Of 9506 individuals who responded
to the survey, 78 gave no information on age or sex, and 4078
people gave no information about KP/KOA, and these were
excluded from the analyses. Thus, the total available eligible
individuals for the study were 5350, of whom 2832 had either KP
and/or KOA and the remaining 2518 were selected as controls.
Controls were not matched for any variables. Details of the
participant selection is provided in Supplementary Fig. S1, available
at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online.
Sample size
We used the available information from a previous study on
comorbidities in OA for sample size calculation [25]. The minimum
needed to detect an odds ratio (OR) of 1.36 with 42.2% controls
exposed with a power of 80% and significance level of 0.05 was
1790 (1:1 ratio).
Comorbidities
KPIC also collected information on self-reported physician-
diagnosed chronic conditions. The questionnaire provided a check
list of 10 physician-diagnosed chronic conditions to choose from
[high cholesterol, heart attack/angina, high blood pressure, OA,
diabetes, stroke, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), FM, chronic
fatigue syndrome and cancer], together with an open-ended
question ‘other’. From open responses to the ‘others’, 26 additional
chronic conditions were added to the above list of 10, giving a total
of 36 possible comorbidities. These were grouped into 10 systems
according to similar physiological and pathological characteristics
[cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, chronic widespread pain,
musculoskeletal, psychological, genitourinary, respiratory, cancer
(any), neurological and endocrine] recorded in primary care records
[10]. Details of the conditions and their grouping are given in
(Supplementary Appendix 1, available at Rheumatology Advances in
Practice online).
Analgesics
Self-reported use of prescribed and/or over-the-counter oral
analgesics at baseline, specifically paracetamol, NSAIDs including
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) selective inhibitors, and opioids (might
or might not be for KP), were included in the analysis. Participants
were asked to list the names of current medicines and the duration
of their use in years and months. Use of drugs by the participants
was coded as ‘yes’, otherwise ‘no’. Furthermore, the years of
exposure were categorized as 0, 1–5, 6–10 or >10 years since the
first date of reported use.
Data analysis
Descriptive analysis was done for baseline characteristics such as
age, sex,and BMI. Categorical variables were described with
proportions, and continuous variables were described as the mean
and s.d. or median with interquartile range (IQR) as appropriate
across the KP and non-KP groups. Obesity was defined as a BMI of
≥30 kg/m2 [26]. Univariate associations were explored through χ2
tests and unpaired Student’s t-tests. Participants with missing
information on age and sex were excluded from the final analysis
[27].
The main objective was to examine the prevalence of any
comorbidities in those with KP compared with those without. The
number of comorbidities was calculated by adding all the chronic
conditions reported (other than KP) and grouped into categories of
none, one, two or three or more. The prevalence with individual
comorbidities in the tw