
Method Using Trinary
Frequency-Shift Keying
Encoded SSVEP (TFSK-SSVEP)
Xing Zhao
Xing Zhao
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Bioinformatics,
Chongqing University of Post and Telecommunications, Chongqing,
China
Find articles by Xing Zhao
1, Dechun Zhao
Dechun Zhao
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Bioinformatics,
Chongqing University of Post and Telecommunications, Chongqing,
China
Find articles by Dechun Zhao
1,*, Xia Wang
Xia Wang
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Bioinformatics,
Chongqing University of Post and Telecommunications, Chongqing,
China
Find articles by Xia Wang
1, Xiaorong Hou
Xiaorong Hou
2Department of Health Information Management and Decision
Making, College of Medical Informatics, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China
Find articles by Xiaorong Hou
2
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC5454068  PMID: 28626393
Abstract
SSVEP is a kind of BCI technology with advantage of high
information transfer rate. However, due to its nature, frequencies
could be used as stimuli are scarce. To solve such problem, a stimuli
encoding method which encodes SSVEP signal using Frequency
Shift–Keying (FSK) method is developed. In this method, each
stimulus is controlled by a FSK signal which contains three different
frequencies that represent “Bit 0,” “Bit 1” and “Bit 2” respectively.
Different to common BFSK in digital communication, “Bit 0” and
“Bit 1” composited the unique identifier of stimuli in binary bit
stream form, while “Bit 2” indicates the ending of a stimuli
encoding. EEG signal is acquired on channel Oz, O1, O2, Pz, P3,
and P4, using ADS1299 at the sample rate of 250 SPS. Before
original EEG signal is quadrature demodulated, it is detrended and
then band-pass filtered using FFT-based FIR filtering to remove
interference. Valid peak of the processed signal is acquired by
calculating its derivative and converted into bit stream using
window method. Theoretically, this coding method could
implement at least 2n−1 (n is the length of bit command) stimulus
while keeping the ITR the same. This method is suitable to
implement stimuli on a monitor and where the frequency and phase
could be used to code stimuli is limited as well as implementing
portable BCI devices which is not capable of performing complex
calculations.
Keywords: SSVEP, BCI, EEG, HMI, FSK-SSVEP, TFSK-SSVEP
Introduction
“Brain-Computer Interface” (BCI) is a very attractive technology
which provides hands-free access to devices for the situation where
the access to input device proves to be rather difficult, e.g., space
exploration or provide patients who suffers ALS or other body
disabilities a mean to express themselves (Trejo et al., 2006; Parini
et al., 2009). BCI usually directly interacts with the cerebral activity
which is evoked or self-induced and translate it into computer
instructions (Wolpaw et al., 2002; McFarland and Wolpaw, 2011).
There are many different approaches trying to restore the broken
communication between brain and environment from many aspects.
These methods include “Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging”
(fMRI) which is blood oxygenation level dependent and the invasive
Electrocorticography (ECoG) as well as Electroencephalography
(EEG). Comparing to other non-invasive methods, EEG provides
temporal resolution up to milliseconds while it is cheaper, non-
radioactive and provides high portability which makes EEG become
a favorable choice when building a BCI system (Sitaram et al.,
2007; Cincotti et al., 2008; Athanasiou and Bamidis, 2010; Becedas,
2012; Pistohl et al., 2012; Baranauskas, 2014).
“Steady-State Visually Evoked Potential” (SSVEP) is a kind of EEG
signal generated at the visual cortex. It usually evoked by visual
stimuli which flickers at the range of around 5–20 Hz while LEDs or
monitors are often used as the stimuli (Herrmann, 2001; Wang et
al., 2006; Friman et al., 2007; Guger et al., 2012; Zhang et al.,
2012). Due to its nature of high temporal resolution of milliseconds,
SSVEP possesses great potentials in real-time application while
methods like PET, fMRI, and NIRS which utilize the metabolism
provide good spatial resolution but poor temporal resolution;
making them a less desirable candidate for real-time brain-
computer communication (Wolpaw et al., 2002; Becedas, 2012;
Birbaumer et al., 2013).
SSVEP is a very efficient way for a user to impose his or her will. In
most situations, user who suffers from “Amyotrophic Lateral
Scleroses” (ALS) or palsy tend to still have functional vision under
good control while other parts of their body is disabled (Singla,
2014). Visual evoked potential is known to associate with visual
stimulations and always changes according to it. Eye's sensitivity to
the stimuli is the highest at the center of the vision field. It is due to
the retinal cones cell concentrate at the center (Sutter, 1992;
McFarland and Wolpaw, 2011). In this way, the visual evoked
potential signal carries some of the properties of the stimuli which
user concentrates on, such as frequency and phase of the signal. By
comparing the extracted signal with the stimuli, one could tell
which stimuli the user is gazing at and then translate such
information into computer instructions.
To build a practical real-time BCI system, many genius minds
proposed various kinds of strategies trying to increase the accuracy
as well as the spelling speed of SSVEP based BCI system. Nowadays,
the spelling speed of a high performance SSVEP system could
achieve an ITR (Information Transfer Rate) of around 144 bits per
minute (Nakanishi et al., 2014). To build a practical SSVEP BCI
system, one must improve the effect of stimulus, increasing the
number of stimulus, minimizing processing time while trying hard
to keep the accuracy as high as possible. Since the optimal
frequency to be utilized in stimuli is 5–20 Hz. To increase the
number of the stimuli, it must be coded. Therefore, many coding
strategies were proposed to increase the number of stimulus as well
as to increase the “Signal Noise Ratio” (SNR); such methods are:
“Time Division Multiple Access” (TDMA), “Frequency Division
Multiple Access” (FDMA), and “Code Division Multiple Access”
(CDMA) (Wei et al., 2016). It is worth noting that a practical BCI
system which uses monitor to represent the stimulus would be
bound to the refreshing rate of the monitor, which limited the
stimulus could be implemented on a monitor. In order to tackle this
problem, Wang proposed a strategy which can present stimulus with
frequency less than half of the refreshing rate of the monitor (Wang
et al., 2010). Still, the range of idea frequency to be used as stimuli
is limited to 5–20 Hz, which could code about 40 stimuli with 0.2
Hz intervals when coding the stimulus with different frequencies
(Herrmann, 2001). Nakanishi et al. used a coding method of
methods of mixing frequency and phase and achieved 32 stimuli
(Zhang et al., 2012). Chen et al. used similar method and
implemented a speller with 40 targets on a monitor (Chen et al.,
2015). Wei et al. used a binary encoding method, which in theory
could encode stimulus as many as needed (Wei et al., 2016).
However, the binary encoding method used by Wei et al. is using up
to 63 bits. Such method makes the processing too long to build a
practical and portable BCI system. Kimura et al. also proposed a
coding strategy adopting Frequency Shift-Keying (FSK) in digital
telecommunication (Kimura et al., 2013).
Performance of the EEG signal processing algorithm would also
have a great influence on the performance of a BCI system. An ideal
algorithm should have high accuracy and low complexity so that it
could be fit into embedded devices or FPGAs (Hwang et al., 2013).
After comparing the coding methods above, it would become clear
that using binary coding strategy would face the problem of rather
low accuracy due to the problem of “coding repetition.” While
using a binary coding strategy to coding the stimuli, the beginning
or the ending of the scheme is not distinguishable. For example, if a
stimulus is coded with “1101,” the output of the bit stream would
be an iteration of “1101.” However, since it is rather difficult to tell
the ending of each segments; It is possible for the system to
misinterpret the output “1101110111011101” into 1 1011 1011
1011 101 rather than 1101 1101 1101 1101. Meanwhile, the
complex coding strategy used by these methods often requires a lot
of computational power and thus limited their application in
portable BCI devices which based on embedded device and
batteries.
To mark the ending of each code, another third bit was introduced
additional from the “Binary Frequency-Shifted Keying” (BFSK) used
by Kimura which is named “Bit 2.” An experiment was conducted to
evaluate its feasibility. By introducing this third bit, one could
easily tell the ending of each code and thus increase the accuracy of
binary encoded stimuli based BCI system.
Materials and methods
Modulation of FSK-SSVEP stimuli signal
Frequency-Shift Keying is a modulation method commonly used in
digital communication. It shifts the frequency of a continuous
binary signal to two discrete frequencies as a “space frequency” and
a “mark frequency” representing “0” and “1” in binary respectively.
Such modulation is called “Binary Frequency-Shift Keying” (BFSK)
or FSK for short. Unlike to the traditional modulation of BFSK
which is commonly seen in digital communication. In this paper,
the third frequency is introduced in “Trinary Frequency-Shift
Keying-SSVEP” (TFSK-SSVEP) as the “separate frequency” which
represents “Bit 2” apart the bits representing “1” and “0.” This third
bit marks the ending of each stimuli encoding composited by “1”
and “0.” The Figure 1 showed an example of FSK-SSVEP signal
modulation of three periods of bit stream “11012” with bit length of
1,000 ms and continued phase. “Bit 0,” “Bit 1,” and “Bit 2” are
correspond to 7, 11, and 15 Hz 