
Materials and Methods
Software
We developed our feature detection algorithm in C++ within the
OpenMS open-source framework for computational mass
spectrometry,15 version 2.1. Internally, our software makes use of
the OpenSWATH toolset for DIA data analysis17 and of the LIBSVM
C library,18 version 3.12. The two libraries are included in or come
bundled with OpenMS, respectively. In the analysis of the
benchmark data set (see below), we used several of the executable
tools provided by OpenMS for various data processing tasks. For
downstream data analysis we used the R environment for statistical
computing,19 versions 3.3.0 and 3.3.2., and especially the MSstats R
package,20 version 3.6.0, for quantification on the protein level.
Benchmark Data Set
We evaluated our algorithm based on data from the iPRG-2015
study.21 The data set consists of four biological samples, analyzed
in three technical replicates (12 LC–MS/MS runs in total). The
samples contain yeast cell lysate with spike-ins of six different
purified proteins at varying concentrations. LC–MS/MS data were
acquired on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive orbitrap instrument,
then centroided and converted to mzML using the ProteoWizard
software. We downloaded the data in mzML format from the study
repository (ftp://iprg_study:ABRF329@ftp.peptideatlas.org).
This data set had been analyzed by Zhang and colleagues for their
publication on the DeMix-Q workflow, which included a benchmark
of multiple other software tools for label-free quantification.14
Information about the spike-in proteins and the amounts used was
taken from supplementary table 1 of this publication. The authors
also kindly made their peptide/protein identification results
available, which were generated using the DeMix search pipeline.22
The results were prefiltered to 1% FDR on the PSM level. We
performed the peptide-to-protein mapping and removed
nonmatching (decoy) peptides using the OpenMS tools
PeptideIndexer and IDFilter. Afterward the data contained around
28 300 (±2200) peptide IDs per file, corresponding to around
21 100 (±1800) distinct peptide sequences (including
modifications) per file. We used this data in our analysis to enable a
comparison with DeMix-Q and, by extension, with the other
software tools tested by Zhang et al.
FeatureFinderIdentification Analyses
In analyses incorporating external peptide IDs, prior to feature
detection with FFId, retention time alignments of those IDs were
performed using OpenMS tools. For each LC–MS/MS run, its
internal IDs were used as reference to align external IDs from other
runs, using MapAlignerIdentification11 with the “lowess” smoothing
option. Subsequently external IDs from multiple runs were merged
using IDMerger. In all FFId analyses, two isotopologues per peptide
(monoisotopic and 13C peak) were used in the generation of assays.
The expected elution peak width was set to 40 s. The m/z window
size for chromatogram extraction was 10 ppm.
Variability of Peptide Quantification
To compute coefficients of variation (CVs) of peptide abundances,
FFId feature detection results were first processed with
ProteinQuantifier to obtain peptide quantities. The peptide data was
loaded into R and normalized using simple scaling to equal medians
to correct for global differences between the LC–MS/MS runs. The
following data processing choices were made to allow comparisons
to the results reported for DeMix-Q and other software tools:14
Abundances of differently modified variants of the same peptide
sequence were summed. Only peptides that were quantified in all
12 runs were considered. Peptides from spike-in proteins were not
excluded from the analysis. (Although their abundances are not
expected to be constant, the influence on median CVs is negligible.)
Finally, CVs for the resulting peptide abundances were calculated.
