
Methods
ERGs were recorded under dark-and light-adapted conditions from
the corneal surface of nob2 mice, WT littermates and nob4 mice.
ERG frequency spectra were calculated by fast Fourier transform
(FFT). A FFT-based high-pass filter was used to derive OP
waveforms.
Results
Under dark-adapted conditions, the dominant frequency of the OPs
varied between 90 to 120 Hz in WT mice. In WT mice, OP
frequency first increased with flash intensity and then decreased at
the highest flash levels while overall OP amplitude increased
monotonically with increasing flash intensity. In response to low
stimulus flashes, reliable OPs were not obtained from nob2 mice.
OPs were only seen at stimulus intensities at or above −1.8 log cd
s/m2, where they occurred at a lower frequency range (70–90 Hz)
than for WT mice. When flash stimuli were superimposed against a
steady rod-desensitizing adapting field, the amplitude and
frequency of WT OPs increased with flash intensity above 0.4 log cd
s/m2. In comparison to WT results, cone-mediated OPs obtained
from nob2 mice were smaller in amplitude, of lower frequency and
had delayed implicit times. We compared the extent to which OPs
and the b-wave were reduced in nob2 mice, by normalizing to the
results obtained from WT mice. In comparison to the b-wave, the
OPs were relatively spared, under both dark- and light-adapted
conditions.
Conclusions
In nob2 mice, rod- and cone-driven OPs are reduced in amplitude
and occur at a lower frequency range. Since CaV1.4 is expressed in
both the inner and outer plexiform layers, these changes are likely
to reflect reduced transmission from photoreceptors to bipolar cells
as well as alterations in inner retinal function. That the OPs were
better preserved than b-waves suggests that inner retinal pathways
may be reorganized in response to the decreased bipolar cell
response in nob2 mice.
Keywords: Oscillatory potentials, Electroretinogram, nob2, Mice,
Frequency spectrum, Voltage dependent calcium channel
Introduction
The visual signal initiated by light capture in photoreceptor outer
segments is transmitted centrally through the retina by neurons that
use glutamate as an excitatory neurotransmitter. The release of
glutamate by photoreceptors is highest in darkness [1], and light-
activated hyperpolarization of photoreceptors reduces glutamate
release secondary to an influx of calcium through voltage-
dependent calcium channels (VDCCs) at the synaptic terminal [2].
This process is altered in several forms of human congenital
stationary night blindness (CSNB) involving CACNA1F [3–6],
CACNA2D4 [7] or CABP4 [8]. Given the importance of these
proteins in regulating glutamate release, the human phenotypes are
relatively homogeneous. They all have a marked loss of the
electroretinogram (ERG) b-wave, reduced but not abolished rod-
mediated sensitivity, and reduced visual acuity. Based on these
observations, these disorders all fall within the incomplete CSNB
category, as originally defined by Miyake et al. [9].
Mutant mice carrying homologous gene defects provide useful
animal models for the study of many human disorders. With respect
to incomplete CSNB, mouse models for Cacna1f [10, 11], Cacna2d4
[12, 13] and Cabp4 [14], can be used to better understand this class
of retinal disorder. In the present study, we have examined nob2
mice, which have a naturally occurring loss-of-function mutation in
the Cacna1f gene encoding the CaV1.4 subunit of VDCCs [11]. In
comparison to control littermates, nob2 mice exhibit a reduced ERG
b-wave, with little effect on the leading edge of the a-wave [11].
While the high frequency oscillatory potentials (OPs) appear to be
reduced in amplitude, these have not been studied in detail.
Nevertheless, immunohistochemical studies [15, 16] have
demonstrated that CaV1.4 is localized to the OPL and to the IPL
where the OPs are generated [17]. While the attenuated b-wave can
be attributed to the loss of CaV1.4 in the OPL, the role of this
channel in the IPL remains poorly understood and it is not clear
how its absence would alter inner retinal function. Although it
seems reasonable to predict that inner retinal function might be
more severely compromised, the sensitivity of nob2 retinal ganglion
cells is relatively normal under light-adapted conditions [11]. In the
present study we examined nob2 OPs and compared their
attenuation to that of the ERG b-wave.
Methods
Mice
ERGs were recorded from 13 nob2 mice, 9 wild type (WT)
littermates and 4 nob4 mice, all on a C57BL/6J background. WT
and nob2 mice were generated from breeders obtained from The
Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). We obtained nob4 breeders
from the mutagenesis program at Northwestern University [12]. We
tested nob2 and WT mice at 7 weeks of age and nob4 mice at 10–15
weeks of age. All procedures involving mice were approved by the
institutional animal care and use committee of the Cleveland Clinic
Foundation.
Recording
After overnight dark adaptation, mice were anesthetized with a
mixture of ketamine (80 mg/kg) and xylazine (16 mg/kg) diluted in
saline. The pupils were dilated with eye drops (1% mydriacyl, 1%
cyclopentolate HCl, 2.5% phenylephrine HCl) and the corneal
surface was anesthetized with 0.5% proparacaine HCl eye drops.
Mice were placed on a temperature-regulated heating pad during
the ERG recording session.
ERGs were recorded using a stainless steel electrode that made
contact with the center of corneal surface through a thin layer of
0.7% methylcellulose. Needle electrodes were subcutaneously
inserted into the cheek and the tail as reference and ground leads,
respectively. Under these conditions, mice usually develop
reversible cataracts [18]. The ERG responses were differentially
amplified (0.3–1,500 Hz), averaged and stored using a UTAS-E3000
Electrophysiology System (LKC Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD,
USA). Responses were digitized at 1,024 Hz. The recording epoch
was 500 ms, with a 180 ms pre-stimulation baseline. A notch filter
was used during dark-adapted ERG recordings for nob2 and WT
mice. The filter was not applied in dark-adapted ERG recording for
nob4 mice, nor for any light-adapted recordings.
Stimulus flashes were presented in a LKC ganzfeld bowl. A total of
ten stimulus intensities, ranging from −3.6 to 2.1 log cd s/m2, were
used under dark-adapted conditions. Stimuli were presented in
order of increasing intensity and at least 2 successive responses
were averaged, except at the highest stimulus intensity where a
single response was collected. As strobe flash intensity increased,
retinal dark adaptation was maintained by increasing the
interstimulus interval from 4.1 to 55.1 s. After the dark-adapted
series were complete, a steady adapting field (1.5 log cd/m2) was
presented inside the ganzfeld. After a 5 min light adaptation period
[19], a total of 7 stimulus intensities ranging from −0.8 to 1.9 log
cd s/m2 were superimposed against the adapting field. Cone ERGs
were obtained to stimuli presented at 2.1 Hz and represent the
average of responses to 50 successive stimulus flashes. The system
was calibrated with a photometer equipped with a flash integrator.
Analysis
Figure 1a presents three versions of the same ERG signal under
dark-adapted condition. The upper trace is the original ERG
waveform. The middle trace is the waveform after filtering the
frequency components higher than 38 Hz from the original ERG
waveform. The lower trace is the waveform after filtering the
frequency components lower than or equal to 38 Hz from the
original ERG waveform, using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) and
subsequent inverse FFT, implemented by an algorithm written in
Matlab 6.1 (The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). To obtain the OP
waveform in the time domain, the inverse FFT was performed with
the frequency spectra after eliminating the components from 0 to a
cut-off frequency. Figure 1b shows representative ERG waveforms
recorded under light-adapted condition with the same processing.
In Fig. 1a and b, the waveform remaining after eliminating the
frequency components higher than 38 Hz is the same as the low
frequency components (e.g. the a-wave and b-wave) in the original
ERG waveform. In addition, the waveform after the high-pass
filtering does not show a- or b-wave components. Therefore, a cut-
off frequency of 38 Hz was chosen for analysis of both dark-adapted
and light-adapted data. Figure 1c and d show the frequency spectra
of the original ERG shown in Fig. 1a and b respectively, derived
from FFT (thin continuous curve) and the difference between the
original ERG and the filtered OP signal (thick dashed curve) which
is zero above 38 Hz.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
(a) Example of an original ERG waveform recorded from a WT
mouse to 0.0 log cd s/m2 stimulus flash (upper trace), the
remaining waveform after eliminating the frequency components
higher than 38 Hz (middle trace), and the derived OP signal (lower
trace) under dark-adapted condition. (b) Example of an ERG
recorded from a WT mouse to 0.4 log cd s/m2 stimulus flash (upper
trace) and the derived OP signal (lower trace) under light-adapted
condition. (c) The frequency spectrum derived from the original
waveform shown in (a) (thin continuous curve) and the difference
of the frequency spectra between the original ERG and the filtered
OP signal (thick dashed curve). Open arrows show the range for the
intergration of power around the dominant frequency peak. (d) The
frequency spectrum derived from the original waveform shown in
(b) (thin continuous curve) and the difference of the frequency
spectra between the original ERG and the filtered OP signal (thick
dashed curve). Open arrows show the range for the intergration of
power around the dominant frequency peak. Note that the
amplitude axis truncates the low frequency region of this plot
Because the amplitudes of frequency components were relatively
low in nob4 and nob2 mice, a Hamming window function was
applied to the raw ERG signal before computing th