
Methods
For 1 D MS spectrum, we first perform spectrum preprocessing to
remove the baseline, filter the noise and generate a list of peptide
candidates. Then BPDA is applied based on the developed MS
model to infer the best fitting peptide signals of the observed
spectrum, the results being peptide abundances, existence
probabilities and so on. For 2 D LC-MS spectra, we first detect
peptide elution peaks along the retention time dimension, and build
elution peak groups by collecting the peaks which have similar
retention time together using a method similar to [24]. Each group
contains a series of consecutive spectra, which are then averaged to
form a mean spectrum. The rationale of using a mean spectrum to
represent the group is that the noise of consecutive spectra could be
canceled out to a certain degree [11]. The BPDA algorithm is then
applied to each of the mean spectra, and finally an overall peptide
list is generated. The details of the preprocessing step, the proposed
MS model, and the BPDA algorithm are described in the following
subsections.
Spectrum preprocessing and obtaining peptide
candidates
A non-flat baseline is often observed in mass spectra, the presence
of which can distort the true signal pattern. Thus the first
preprocessing step is to detect and subtract the baseline from MS
spectra. We use the minimum of a sliding window along the m/z
axis as the baseline, similar to the method used in [10]. The next
step is peak detection. We use the Matlab function "mspeaks" [26]
to perform this task. The algorithm first identifies all local maxima
in the wavelet denoised spectrum as putative peak locations. Then
peaks are filtered based on their intensities and signal to noise
ratios. The last step of preprocessing is to obtain a list of peptide
candidates. Considering one detected peak with centroid at m/z
value d, we want to find out which peptides can potentially register
a peak at this position. The answer is given below in terms of the
masses of such peptides:
mass=i(d−mpc)−jmnt, i=1,2, ..., cs, j=0,1, ..., 
iso,
(1)
where mass is the mass of one peptide candidate, mpc is the mass of
one positive charge and mnt is the mass shift caused by addition of
one neutron. Due to mass defect, the mass shift varies for different
elements. We approximate mnt using the mass shift from 13C to 12C,
which is 1.0034, since Carbon contributes most to the isotope
patterns. This approximation works well if the mass calibration of
the instrument is correct. The parameters cs and iso are user defined
maximum numbers of considered charge states and isotopic
positions, respectively. It is easy to see from the above equation that
each detected peak gives rise to cs × (iso + 1) different peptide
candidates (masses). These candidates exhaust all the possibilities to
generate the peak with centroid d, but it does not follow that all the
candidates really exist in the sample. Therefore, our primary goal in
peptide detection is to find the existence probability of each peptide
candidate. Also note that the total number of candidates should be
less than or equal to cs × (iso + 1) × number of detected peaks, as
is possible that multiple peaks yield the same candidate mass.
Modeling the mass spectrum
Suppose N peptide candidates are obtained from the observed
spectrum using the method described in the previous section. Each
candidate can generate a series of peaks over different charge
states, and at each charge state several isotopic peaks can be
registered. The signal generated by the kth peptide candidate is thus
modeled by the following equation, in which i and j represent the
charge state and the isotopic position of the candidate peptide,
respectively:
gk(xm)=∑i=1cs∑j=0isock,ijf(xm;ρk,ij,αk,ij), m=1,2, ..., M, (2)
where the peak shape function is given by f(xm;ρk,ij,αk,ij) =e–
ρk,ij(xm–αk,ij)2. That is, the peak is modeled as Gaussian-shaped,
as in [27]. It is reported that the Gaussian-shaped peak
approximates the reality well enough to obtain good detection
results [17]. Still, this peak shape function can be adjusted for
different instruments without affecting the overall structure of the
algorithm.
The observed spectrum is a mixture of the signal generated by the N
peptide candidates plus Gaussian random noise, which can be
modeled as:
ym=∑k=1Nλkgk(xm)+ϵm=∑k=1Nλk∑i=1cs∑j=0isock,ijf(xm;ρk,ij,αk,i
m=1,2,…,M,
(3)
In the above three equations, xm is the mth mass-to-charge ratio (m/
z) in the spectrum, ym is the observed intensity at xm, M is the
number of observations, and ϵm is Gaussian random noise with zero
mean and standard deviation σ. The value of can be approximated
by the standard deviation of the background region in the spectrum.
Note that we model ϵm as additive Gaussian which is generally a
good model for the thermal noise in electronic instruments. There
