
Experimental characterizations have addressed yield strength,
microporosity, alternative material systems, coatings, and
densification[11, 13, 16, 20–22]. Filling the metallic spheres with
mineral or ceramic particles yields particle-filled hollow sphere
structures (PHSS) [23], in which additional energy dissipates
through particle-particle and particle-shell collisions, further
enhancing damping[15, 23, 24].
Complementing the experimental investigations, a number of
theoretical and numerical investigations were conducted to
determine the mechanical properties of HSCs. For instance,
exploiting formal similarities of HSCs and foams, mechanical
properties were estimated by heuristic formulas developed for
foams, see the works [12, 23, 25] and Gibson-Ashby [26, §5].
Several studies utilizing finite element method (FEM) models were
conducted on regularly arranged HSCs and cellular structures to
determine the yield strength [27–30], the creep  [31], and the
buckling behavior [32], the thermal conductivity [14], and the
fracture behavior [20]. Furthermore, the compression of a single
hollow sphere [33] and the impact behavior of an HSC [34] were
investigated. To determine the acoustic properties, tube absorption
methods were used [35].
To determine the mechanical properties of a material accurately,
the proper microstructure should be taken into account [36]. The
aforementioned contributions all restrict to regular sphere
arrangements, presumably due to restrictions on the computational
feasibility. Key features of industrial PHSS include random filler size
distribution, imperfections and manufacturing-induced variations.
Simplified microstructural models neglect these aspects and, as a
result, fail to accurately represent real microstructures or to capture
their influence on effective material properties.
Different approaches were developed to model random
microstructures, in particular accounting for non-uniform sphere
sizes and irregular arrangements. The simplest method is random
sequential adsorption (RSA) [37], which places spheres one by one
such that no overlap with previously placed spheres occurs,
terminating once the target volume fraction is reached. RSA cannot
reach high packing densities, which motivated dynamic and
contraction-based alternatives [38–40]. The sequential addition and
migration method (SAM) [41, 42], originally developed for fiber-
reinforced composites and equally applicable to spheres, achieves
significantly higher packing densities than RSA by adding only a
portion of the inclusions at a time and removing overlaps before the
next addition step.
In addition to the spheres of the HSCs, the glued adhering them
must be modeled as well. In previous contributions [43, 44], an
organic interface between spheres is modeled via a thin, uniform
outer layer for regular and random sphere arrangements. To
account for the connectivity of pores, one may use operators from
mathematical morphology [45], specifically the closing
operation [46, §4]. To represent the binder in casting applications,
the closing was performed on a digitized microstructure [47] or an
approximation of the level-set function was utilized [48].
Morphological operations on spheres result in overlapping sphere
assemblies. For these assemblies, analytical analyses for
advantageous decompositions and inclusion-exclusion strategies
exist [49, 50]. These strategies were originally proposed for the
description of molecules [51].
In summary, HSCs demonstrate excellent lightweight properties,
and particle filling enhances their damping capabilities. Tailored
experiments provided numerous insights into the material
properties. Such experiments may be complemented by dedicated
computational approaches, in particular to cover a wider range of
variations within the material at a comparatively low cost.
However, existing approaches do not provide microstructure
representations that simultaneously capture
(i)
irregular sphere arrangements,
(ii)
thin interphases between particles, and
(iii)
efficient evaluation within computational homogenization
frameworks.
These shortcomings limit their applicability for realistic HSCs.
Contributions
To overcome these limitations, we develop a microstructure
modeling framework for glued hollow-sphere assemblies that
combines an analytic level-set representation with an FFT-based
homogenization approach.
The computational studies for HSCs presented in the introductory
section 1.1 offer valuable insights; however, they only consider
highly idealized microstructures, such as grid-like sphere
arrangements or systems with only small epoxy fractions. In
particular, the typically considered cubic sphere arrangement with
isotropic constituent materials leads to an effective stiffness tensor
which reflects the cubic symmetry of the microstructure, i.e., the
proposed microstructure model does not match the isotropic
material behavior observed for real HSCs [1]. Therefore, we aim to
create random sphere assemblies with no preferred direction(s) and
analyze their apparent elastic material properties. Both Schneider et
al. [47] and Donval et al. [48] consider irregular geometric
arrangements of sand grains that are bonded together by an
inorganic binder and modeled using a morphological operator. We
take a similar approach, determining the binder/epoxy phase via a
closing operation with an exact level-set function in the continuous
setting. We introduce a projection scheme to determine the level-set
function for a union of overlapping balls. This microstructure
representation is then used to predict the macroscopic behavior of
hollow sphere composites based on their microstructure,
specifically, the linear elastic properties of randomly arranged
hollow spheres (HS) joined by epoxy.
Microstructure parameters that can be directly controlled during the
manufacturing process are of particular interest. For HSCs, such
parameters include the nominal wall thickness of the hollow
spheres and the amount of epoxy within the composite. The
influence of other parameters, such as the sphere packing density
and the shell size distribution, is also of interest because these
parameters could also be regulated, albeit with greater effort. For
example, particle-filled hollow spheres could be screened for
minimum and maximum diameters to influence the sphere size
distribution [11]. A comprehensive understanding of the impact of
manufacturing parameters facilitates the identification of
production steps that require meticulous attention depending on the
sensitivity of the effective stiffness with respect to the parameters
influenced by said production step.
We demonstrate that the previously outlined material modeling
approach is able to represent industrial HSCs. We utilize
computational homogenization methods based on the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT), originally developed by Moulinec and Suquet [52,
53] and subsequently extended in various directions [54–56]. FFT-
based methods operate on a regular voxel grid and prove
advantageous for complex microstructures such as the HSCs, since
boundary-conforming mesh generation is avoided. Determining the
material phase is rather straightforward if level-set functions are
available, offering a fully contained homogenization framework. Of
particular relevance to the work at hand is the use of stable
discretizations [57, 58] required to handle porous materials [59]
and the composite voxel method [60, 61]. The latter requires
determining the volume fractions of the individual material phases
within interface voxels, and the provided analytic level-set
representation permits determining those fractions in a grid-
independent and robust way.
The high damping of HSCs is a geometric effect, improving the
dissipation capabilities significantly compared to the dense bulk
material. Since the forces between neighboring spheres are
transmitted through thin shells and epoxy bridges, a modest
macroscopic strain produces rather large strain and stress
amplitudes locally in these connective regions, increasing material
damping [62, 63]. Predicting the damping of an HSC, therefore,
reduces, in essence, to predicting where and how strain is
distributed in the microstructure under load. Therefore, any error
made for the elastic model is inherited by the identified damping
parameters. Following the elastic-viscoelastic correspondence
principle [64], we therefore determine the elastic response first,
leaving only the dissipative parameters to be identified in a
subsequent step. The material modeling in this linear elastic step is
the focus of the present work.
In Sect. 2.1, we introduce the microstructure under consideration.
Section 2.2 summarizes the experimental approach to determine the
effective elastic properties of the material using the impulse
excitation technique (IET). In Sect. 2.3, we discuss the
morphological closing operator used to determine the connectivity
between the spheres within an HSC as well as the general approach
to microstructure generation of an HSC. To perform the erosion
operation, a level-set function must be determined first. Therefore,
in Sect. 2.4, we introduce an algorithm for determining the level-set
function of a three-dimensional union of balls and discuss how to
identify the material phase for any point within the domain. We
also present some resulting periodic microstructures.
In Sect. 4, we study the influence of different factors on the ensuing
mechanical properties. To do so, we use the findings obtained in
Sect. 3. Furthermore, we determine the local stress fields in
Sect. 4.1, where we also analyze the stress localization. In Sect. 4.2,
we present the influence of the volume fraction of epoxy, the shell
thickness of the individual spheres, the sphere size distribution and
the sphere packing density on the elastic moduli. Section 4
concludes the computations with a validation of the computational
model by comparing the experimental results from Sect. 2.2 and
another composi