
Material and Methods
Data Sources
This study is reported in line with the STrengthening the Reporting
of OBservational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement.20
We conducted a retrospective cohort study of adult patients aged 18
years and above who were admitted to the ICUs (coronary care
unit, cardiac surgery recovery unit, surgical intensive care unit,
trauma/surgical intensive care unit, and medical intensive care
unit) of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston,
Massachusetts (BIDMC) between 2001 and 2012.21 We utilized the
Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care-III (MIMIC-III)
database, which is a large, de-identified, comprehensive critical
care database of patients admitted to BIDMC ICUs.21 MIMIC-III is
freely available data with patient’s bedside information such as vital
signs, laboratory data, prescriptions and medical charts, and
procedural and diagnostic codes (International Classification of
Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9-CM) codes).21 Data contain about
38,597 distinct adult patients with 49,785 admissions.21 The
Laboratory for Computational Physiology at Massachusetts Institute
of Technology utilized structured data cleansing and date shifting to
de-identified data in accordance with the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) standards.21
Identification of Sepsis Patients Cohort
Sepsis was defined in this study based on Angus abstraction criteria
implementing the 2001 international consensus conference
definition of severe sepsis using a set of ICD9-CM codes. The
abstraction process followed two steps as described in Horng et al
and Iwashyna et al.22, 23 First, we utilized a set of codes to identify
infection and a set of acute organ dysfunction procedure codes to
identify acute organ dysfunction. Based on these steps, we
retrospectively identified patients with severe sepsis. We reviewed
and updated the original Angus abstraction criteria and included
additional new ICD-9-CM codes for sepsis, severe sepsis, septic
shock, and codes indicative of viral meningitis, cholangitis, and
orbital cellulitis.22, 23 We identified a total of 11,224 patients
diagnosed with sepsis on admission into the ICU between 2001 and
2012. In cases where patients had multiple sepsis episodes, only the
first sepsis episode was considered. Patients with zero (0)
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score and patients less
than 18 years of age were excluded. Patients with missing data or
without documented laboratory tests and vital signs taken within
the first 24 hours of ICU admission were excluded. Average vital
signs or laboratory tests were used in the case of multiple records in
the first 24 hours. A total of 8,200 patients with sepsis admitted in
the ICU met the inclusion criteria and were used as the analytical
sample for this study.24
Medication Exposure
We used the MIMIC-III v1.4 prescription drug file to identify
medication exposure based on generic and brand names. To
evaluate the impact of statin use on 30-day ICU mortality, ICU LOS,
and 30-day in-hospital mortality, we categorized exposure status
into statin users and non-users. Statin users include patients with
record of prescription for atorvastatin, fluvastatin, lovastatin,
pitavastatin, pravastatin, rosuvastatin, or simvastatin before ICU
admission. We defined non-users as patients without pre-ICU
prescription records for the above statins.
Outcome Measures
The two primary outcomes of interest are ICU LOS and 30-day ICU
mortality, and a secondary outcome was 30-day all-cause in-
hospital mortality. Date of death (“DOS”), “INTIME” (ICU admission
date and time) and “OUTTIME” (ICU discharge date and time)
variables were used to determined mortality within 30-days of
admission in the ICU. Only patients with records of DOS between
the “INTIME” and “OUTIME” were included for 30-day ICU
mortality analysis. ICU LOS measured in fractional days is included
in the ‘ICUSTAYS’ file where it is defined as “the length of stay for
the patient for the given ICU stay.” 30-day in-hospital mortality was
determined using the DOS in the hospital “DEATHTIME”, date of
admission “ADMITTIME” and date of discharge “DISCHTIME” from
the MIMIC v1.4 admission file to determine mortality within 30-
days of hospital admission.
Covariates
Covariates included for adjustment were demographic
characteristics such as age, gender, race category, and health
insurance. Clinical characteristics included were vital signs,
laboratory tests, body mass index (BMI), Charlson Comorbidity
Index (CCI), and SOFA score. Severe sepsis and septic shock
diagnostic codes were excluded in the calculation of CCI. Patient’s
height measured during the hospital admission and the average of
weight measured during the first 24 hours of patient’s first ICU stay
were used to calculate the BMI measured in Kg/m2. Using the data
obtained during the first 24 hours of a patient’s first ICU stay, we
calculated the SOFA score by adapting with MIMIC v1.4 data with
the SQL script retrieved from MIMIC GitHub, Inc website (https://
github.com/MIT-LCP/mimic-code/blob/master/concepts/
severityscores/sofa.sql). The following laboratory tests were
included: hemoglobin, albumin, white blood cell, potassium,
sodium, bicarbonate, total cholesterol, high density lipoproteins,
low density lipoproteins, C-reactive protein, and lactate. Laboratory
test parameters included in the SOFA score calculation were not
included as a covariate in the multivariable modelling. Vital signs
included as covariates were heart rates, systolic blood pressure,
diastolic blood pressure, respiratory rates, and body temperature.
Additionally, we added potential immunomodulatory medications
such as steroids, which affect the health outcome of sepsis, as
covariates for adjustment.25 ICU types were categorized into
medical ICU, cardio-coronary ICU(coronary and cardiac surgery
ICU), and surgical ICU (trauma and surgical ICU).
Statistical analysis
We presented baseline characteristics as frequencies and
percentages for categorical variables, mean with standard deviation
and median with interquartile range for continuous variable. In the
multivariate analysis, we used a doubly robust estimation using
augmented inverse probability weighting (AIPW) to estimate the
average treatment effect (ATE) of statin prescription. We performed
separate AIPW modelling for each of the three outcomes: 30-day
ICU mortality, ICU LOS, and 30-day in-hospital mortality. AIPW
combines the propensity score model and the model for the
outcome variables to generate potential outcome means (POM) and
ATEs.26
The AIPW estimation method generates a doubly robust ATE
estimate which is unbiased even if one of the models is mis-
specified.26 AIPW includes propensity score modeling, which has a
balancing score property thus, implying that weighting ensures that
measured patient characteristics are balanced between statin users
and non-statin users as in a RCT.26 Balanced characteristics across
users and non-users is required to establish a causal interpretation
of the effect of statin. Characteristics balance is assessed using
standardized differences such that characteristics are considered
balanced across treatment and control groups if the weighted
standardized difference is closer to zero (0) compared to the
unweighted standardized differences.26 Furthermore, using AIPW
modelling approach, we performed stratification analysis examining
ATE within various ICU sub-types (medical, surgical, and cardio-
coronary units).
In this study, the ATE is an estimate of the average causal effect of
statin use on 30-day ICU mortality, ICU LOS, or 30-day in-hospital
mortality and represents a calculated difference between the POM
of statin users and non-users. ATEs were considered significant at
