
Methods
The three imaging methods were applied to channel data from
multidomain simulations with 757, 800, and 1064 nm wavelengths,
11 target sizes (ranging 0.5 to 3 mm), 18 skin tones [ranging
individual typology angles (ITAs), of –54 deg to 60 deg], and a
previously validated realistic 3D breast model. The signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) and generalized contrast-to-noise ratio (gCNR) were
measured to assess visibility.
Results
With 757 and 800 nm wavelengths, targets underlying dark skin
tones (ITA range: −54  deg to −33  deg) with sizes ≤3  mm were
poorly visible with ≤2.38 to 4.21 mean SNR and ≤0.46 to 0.74
mean gCNR, with smaller targets generally being more visible with
lighter skin tones. A 1064-nm transmit wavelength improved
visualization with DAS and SLSC beamforming, relative to both FFT
reconstruction with a 1064 nm wavelength and DAS or SLSC
beamforming with 757 and 800 nm wavelengths. When combined
with SLSC beamforming, the 1064-nm wavelength offered the
greatest improvements, enabling visualization of simulated target
sizes ranging from 0.5 to 3 mm underlying very light (ITA =
60 deg) to dark (ITA=−54  deg) skin tones, with mean SNR
≤10.01 and mean gCNR ≤1. Visualization of simulated vessel
structures derived from in vivo photoacoustic images was consistent
with simulation-based target size expectations.
Conclusions
Results are promising for advancing next-generation photoacoustic
imaging systems for breast cancer diagnosis across the range of skin
tones represented in healthcare systems throughout the world.
Keywords: breast imaging, photoacoustic imaging, acoustic clutter,
target visibility, coherence-based beamforming
Statement of Discovery.
This work provides the first known in silico demonstrations to
support the benefits of 1064 nm transmit wavelength combined
with short-lag spatial coherence (SLSC) beamforming when
visualizing target sizes ranging 0.5–3 mm underlying very light
(ITA = 60 deg) to dark (ITA = –54 deg) skin tones.
1. Introduction
Photoacoustic imaging is an emerging modality for non-invasive
screening and detection of breast cancer.1 Photoacoustic imaging is
based on the photoacoustic effect, by which optical energy is
converted to acoustic energy.2 Biological tissues absorb energy from
a laser light source which causes thermal expansion and the
emission of acoustic waves3 that can be detected by conventional
clinical ultrasound transducers and used to reconstruct an image.4
X-ray mammography is the current standard for routine breast
cancer screening, but the sensitivity of this imaging modality
decreases in patients with greater breast density.5,6 Alternative
screening methods include magnetic resonance imaging and
ultrasound imaging, but these are limited by high cost and a high
false positive rate, respectively.1,7,8 As the scattering of acoustic
waves in tissue is significantly less than that of optical waves,9
photoacoustic imaging can be used to generate high-resolution
images of hemoglobin content, which is linked to the presence of
cancer.
Hemoglobin has high optical absorption in the near-infrared range
relative to water and other tissues,1 which enables photoacoustic
imaging systems to use this wavelength range to detect vascular
structures. Tumor angiogenesis is a known indication of
malignancy,10 and other reported indicators include hypoxia11 and
elevated hemoglobin levels.12 Several photoacoustic imaging
systems have been developed to differentiate between the
vasculature of benign and malignant breast lesions.3 Abeyakoon
et al.13 developed a feature set based on combined photoacoustic-
ultrasound images that improved diagnostic accuracy of malignant
lesions. However, these diagnostic vessels vary in size.13–17
To non-invasively image these vascular structures, tissue
illumination through the skin is required,18 yet it is limited by the
high optical absorption coefficient of skin in the visible and near-
infrared range due to the presence of melanin,19,20 which decreases
optical penetration depths, particularly for vessels located deeper in
the tissue. This high optical absorption can also result in acoustic
wave emission from the skin into the tissue below, which are
reflected by typical ultrasound scatterers and create artifacts and
acoustic clutter, reducing image quality.21,22 As skin optical
absorption coefficients increase with greater melanin content,20
these two limitations significantly compromise photoacoustic image
quality for individuals with darker skin tones, creating a skin tone
bias in photoacoustic imaging systems.22–24 In addition, Fernandes
et al.25 confirmed skin as the primary source of clutter in
photoacoustic images of a 3D breast tissue model. However, the
relationship between skin tone and target size detectability in
photoacoustic imaging is currently unknown.
Initially developed to predict the risk of sunburn and skin cancer,26
the Fitzpatrick skin type scale has been widely used in dermatology
to classify skin tone,27 although this scale is limited by inaccuracy
and inconsistent use.28 The individual typology angle (ITA)
provides a more objective evaluation that can be calculated based
on the Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage L*a*b* color
system.29 ITA is also reported to be highly correlated with melanin
content in the skin30,31 and is related to the skin optical absorption
coefficient and wavelength through the equation proposed by
Junior et al.32
Short-lag spatial coherence (SLSC) beamforming is an image
reconstruction method shown to reduce clutter and improve
photoacoustic image quality in noisy environments with low optical
fluence.33,34 The SLSC beamformer computes and sums the spatial
coherence between signals received at different transducer elements
across the short spatial lag region to construct an image.35 Clutter
sources have low spatial coherence, which enables the mitigation of
clutter artifacts in SLSC images.36–38 Fernandes et al.34
demonstrated a skin tone bias in photoacoustic imaging of the
radial artery in human volunteers, which was successfully mitigated
by SLSC beamforming, allowing for clear radial artery visualization
in skin tones ranging from light to dark. We expect that SLSC
beamforming will similarly improve target and vessel visualization
in photoacoustic images used to determine the presence of breast
cancer when considering a range of vessel sizes in both lighter and
darker skin tones.
In this paper, the impact of skin tone on target size detectability in
photoacoustic breast imaging is investigated with multidomain
simulations implemented using a previously validated realistic 3D
breast model.39 Representative target sizes, skin tones, and
wavelengths of interest were simulated to quantify target visibility
for a range of imaging scenarios with two amplitude-based
beamforming methods for comparison with SLSC beamforming. We
additionally simulated vessels derived from previously published
features of interest (i.e., splayed vessel and claw features13) and
then compared results with existing in vivo data.
2. Methods
Eleven simulation volumes were constructed based on a realistic 3D
breast model immersed in water, with breast tissue classified as
extremely dense.39 The model volumes were 45×15×20  mm in
the lateral, axial, and elevation directions, respectively, with a voxel
size of 100  μm in each dimension. In each volume, a spherical
photoacoustic target with diameters ranging from 0.5 to 3 mm was
generated, in 0.25 increments. This range was chosen based on
measurements of blood vessels and other diagnostic features from in
vivo patient photoacoustic images,13–17 and the optical and acoustic
properties of the targets were set to those of blood, which is an
important component of tumor detection.10–13 The targets were
centered in the lateral and elevation dimensions of the model, and
the center of each target was placed at a depth of 8.6 mm from the
skin surface (10 mm from the top surface of the volume in the axial
direction), as shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Cross-sectional view of the simulated volumes within the imaging
plane, demonstrating various tissue components and ranges of
simulated photoacoustic target sizes.
Optical simulations were conducted using MCXLAB40 to compute
the fluence of light in the volumes. A collimated Gaussian beam
with a 4-mm waist radius (i.e., 50.3  mm2 illumination area)
emitting 108 photons was centered in the lateral and elevation
dimensions and placed at the top of the volume. Although the
simulated fluence is reported as normalized values, any incident
energy divided by the illumination area is expected to provide
information about the fluence that can be expected in a real system.
To assess the impact of skin tone on target size detectability, 18 ITA
values were simulated (ranging from 60 deg to −54 deg, including
three values per skin tone category, as defined in Refs. 29, 41, and
42 and summarized in Table 1). These ITA values correspond to
previously reported melanin content-to-basal length ratios ranging
from ∼0  mm2/mm at an ITA of 60 deg to ∼2.1  mm2/mm at an ITA
of −60 deg,43 melanosomes/μm2 ranging ∼20  μm−2 at an ITA of
−36.1 deg to ∼100  μm−2 at an ITA of 57.4 deg,43 and melanin
volume fractions (v/v) ranging from 3.6% at an ITA of 56 deg to
40% at an ITA of −47 deg.23 We additionally acknowledge that
although ITA quantifies perceived skin tone, this standalone metric
does not include information about associated molecular or
physiological origins (e.g., whether the skin tone perception is due
to increases in melanin, blood flow, or veins near the skin
surface),44 and a recent review article recommends the
establishment of an effective melanosome volume fraction
parameter based on an assumed epidermal thickness, which can
otherwise vary when simply reporting the volume fraction.45 For
each simulated target size and skin tone, three wavelengths were
simulated (i.e., 757, 800, and 1064 nm). These wavelengths were
chosen becau