
Methods
The objective is to generate a high-resolution infrared dataset that
exhibits a markedly higher level of resolution in comparison to
available datasets. In order to achieve this objective, the only
commercially available infrared camera that can capture infrared
images of up to three megapixels was utilized. Consequently, the
scope of our recording endeavors has been constrained to a variety
of elevated structures, including mountain cable cars, masts, tall
towers and suspension and highway bridges. Only persons were
labeled in the data annotation process. The dataset creation pipeline
is comprised of three distinct stages: data capture, data
preprocessing and data annotation.
Data Collection
The data collection process was conducted using a VarioCAM® HD
research36 camera which is depicted in Fig. 2. At the completion of
the data collection process 17,550 person labels from higher data
acquisition locations were collected. The thermal imaging camera
has a resolution of up to 2048 × 1536 pixels; however at this
resolution, the recording frequency is reduced to one image per ten
seconds. Consequently, this yielded a pure recording time of 9,788
images exceeding over 27 hours. Additionally, the camera -
displayed in Fig. 2 - lacks remote triggering capabilities and had to
be operated manually, thus precluding the possibility of combining
it with a drone. Consequently, the images were predominantly
obtained from the hatches of cabins of mountain cable cars, masts,
towers, or bridges. Individuals discernible in the images were either
bystanders or volunteers traversing the field area. The AIResQ34
dataset was recorded in a series of repetitive cycles in different
locations.
Fig. 2.
[image]
Open in a new tab
The camera utilized for data collection was a VarioCAM® HD
research. This camera is capable of capturing thermal images with a
resolution of up to 2048  × 1536 pixels at a frequency of one
image per ten seconds, within the long-wave infrared (LWIR46)
range.
The thermal images’ drone-like perspective was achieved by
capturing images from mountain cable cars, bridges, and
observation towers, as shown in Fig. 3. The typical shooting height
was found to be between 50 and 120 meters above ground level.
This required the camera operator to be in an optimal position
relative to the actors pretending injury. The dataset was collected
with the help of volunteers, which placed themselves in unusual
postures in the field of view of the camera operator. Prior to the
publication of the dataset, all volunteers were requested to provide
consent, and all volunteers consented to the publication. The
creation process involved a cohort of voluntary participants ranging
in age from 6 to 50 years, with a demographic distribution that was
predominantly male. To ensure the precision of the captured
scenarios, the poses of these primary actors were coordinated in
real-time via radio communication. Furthermore, to enhance the
validity of the dataset, we also recorded unscripted bystanders who
were present in the mountain environment during the sessions. This
combination of coordinated maneuvers and spontaneous pedestrian
