
Methods:
This is a cross-sectional, descriptive diagnostic accuracy study,
oriented by the Guideline for Reporting Reliability and Agreement
Studies (GRAAS), with a sample from the database of the project
"Clinical-functional characterization and evaluation of the treatment
efficacy of patients with carpal tunnel syndrome" of 44 patients,
both genders, divided into a study group with 17 participants and a
control group with 27 participants. A FLIR® T540 camera was used
to capture the thermographic images. The data was acquired and
analyzed using FLIR Tools+ software, which measured the average
temperature of the region of interest. Artificial Neural Networks
were used to classify the thermographic images.
Results:
In terms of the area under the curve was 0.908, the precision
obtained was 90.81%, the accuracy 91.66%, the sensitivity 87.25%
and the specificity 94.44%. The F1-score was 88.99%.
Conclusion:
The main findings, such as the sensitivity and specificity values,
showed significant results indicating that thermography is effective
in detecting CTS. Level of Evidence I; Diagnostic studies –
Investigating a Diagnostic Test.
Keywords: Carpal Tunnel Syndrome, Thermography,
Electromyography
RESUMO
Objetivo:
Avaliar a acurácia da termografia no diagnóstico da síndrome do
túnel do carpo (STC) em comparação com a eletroneuromiografia
(ENMG), considerada o padrão-ouro, em pacientes com indicação
de tratamento cirúrgico recrutados no ambulatório de neurocirurgia
da Irmandade da Santa Casa de Londrina.
Métodos:
Trata-se de um estudo transversal, descritivo, de acurácia
diagnóstica, orientado pela Guideline for Reporting Reliability and
Agreement Studies (GRAAS), com amostra proveniente do banco de
dados do projeto "Caracterização clínico-funcional e avaliação da
eficácia do tratamento de pacientes com síndrome do túnel do
carpo", composta por 44 pacientes de ambos os sexos, divididos em
grupo de estudo com 17 participantes e grupo controle com 27
participantes. Foi utilizada uma câmera FLIR® T540 para captura
das imagens termográficas. Os dados foram adquiridos e analisados
por meio do software FLIR Tools+, que mediu a temperatura média
da região de interesse. Redes neurais artificiais foram utilizadas
para classificar as imagens termográficas.
Resultados:
A área sob a curva foi de 0,908; a precisão obtida foi de 90,81%, a
acurácia de 91,66%, a sensibilidade de 87,25% e a especificidade de
94,44%. O escore F1 foi de 88,99%.
Conclusão:
Os principais achados, como os valores de sensibilidade e
especificidade, apresentaram resultados significativos, indicando
que a termografia é eficaz na detecção da STC. Nível de Evidência
I; Estudos diagnósticos – Investigação de um exame para
diagnóstico.
Descritores: Síndrome do Túnel Carpal, Termografia,
Eletromiografia
INTRODUCTION
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) can involve the dominant hand, the
non-dominant hand or both 1 . The CTS is a restricted, elliptical
space, ventrally confined by the flexor retinaculum; it is inelastic
and resistant; its floor is formed medially by the pisiform and the
hook of the hamate and laterally by the tubercle of the scaphoid
and the tubercle of the trapezius 2 .
CTS is primarily diagnosed through clinical history, physical
examination, and supplementary tests, specifically neuroconduction
studies CTS is diagnosed eminently clinically, through clinical
history, physical examination and supplementary tests, specifically
neuroconduction studies 3 . Loss of discrimination between two
points in the distribution of the median nerve and tenar atrophy
occur in the later stages and show low sensitivity and high
specificityLoss of discrimination between two points in the
distribution of the median nerve and tenar atrophy occur in the
later stages of CTS.
While diagnostic imaging is not routinely required for initial
diagnosis in most cases 4 , it can be valuable in specific situations,
such as dubious cases, recurrent or unrelieved symptoms after
surgical release of the carpal tunnel, and importantly, for evaluating
surrounding soft tissue structures in the carpal tunnel. Ultrasound
and MRI, for example, allow direct visualization of median nerve
compression and these other tissues 5 .
Although electroneuromyography (ENMG) is accepted as the gold
standard for diagnosis, it does not provide information on the
surrounding tissues, which could be important for the etiological
diagnosis 6 .
ENMG alone is unable to confirm or rule out the diagnosis of CTS,
but it is useful for characterizing the severity of median nerve
neuropathy and aiding in differential diagnosis 7 . In recent years,
the use of thermography to help diagnose inflammatory conditions
has been questioned. Thermographic images show temperature
changes in certain body regions, helping with diseases diagnosis
and treatment 8 .
Therefore, the internationally standardized cutaneous thermometric
evaluation is carried out by always comparing the corresponding
halves (dimidia) of the human body 9 . Infrared thermography is the
preferred method for studying the physiology and thermoregulation
of thermal dysfunction associated with pain 10,11 ..
Current image acquisition systems consist of sophisticated thermal
cameras coupled to computers with specific programs where images
can be processed to obtain reliable information, making
thermography a safe and accurate diagnostic method 12 .
The problem with CTS is that it can be misdiagnosed and other
syndromes may be diagnosed as CTS. A study of nerve conduction
and temperature distribution may prove beneficial in clarifying the
diagnosis 13 .
The aim of the study is to evaluate the accuracy of surface
thermography and compare it with ENMG, considered the gold
standard in the CTS diagnosis, in patients with an indication of
surgical treatment recruited from the neurosurgery outpatient clinic
of the Irmandade da Santa Casa de Londrina.
The evaluation of this technological tool as a safe and reliable
diagnostic resource could contribute to new knowledge in the
process of investigating CTS and lead to better treatment results, as
well as being a technique with low operating costs, avoiding the
immediate use of more expensive tests and lower costs for public
authorities, generating a significant scientific and social
contribution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Type of Study
This is a cross-sectional, descriptive diagnostic accuracy study,
oriented by the Guideline for Reporting Reliability and Agreement
Studies (GRAAS) 14 , carried out at Universidade Pitágoras Unopar.
The data analyzed in this study was collected in Londrina-PR.
Ethical Procedures
The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Irmandade
da Santa Casa de Londrina under number 3.276.439, and the
Informed Consent Form was signed by all participants, after an
induction session where a member of the team provided a verbal
description of all the measures and procedures to be carried out.
Eligibility criteria
Inclusion criteria - age 18 or over, having idiopathic bilateral CTS,
presenting one or more of the clinical criteria defined by the
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, normal laboratory
tests to exclude associated pathology (blood count, renal function,
glycemic curve, rheumatic profile and thyroid profile), having
ENMG criteria indicating mild or moderate impairment in the
different combinations between the hands, and no upper limb
limitations or skin lesions preventing them from undergoing the
proposed therapies.
Exclusion criteria - participants with a background of psychiatric
disorders or intellectual disability, pregnant, who had received
previous treatment for CTS or who had been symptomatic for a
period of no more than six months.
Study Sample
This study sample was made up of 44 participants of both genders,
17 of whom were recruited from the neurosurgery outpatient clinic
of the Irmandade da Santa Casa de Londrina with idiopathic carpal
tunnel syndrome with indication of surgical treatment, while the
other 27 individuals formed the control group. All the participants
in the sample underwent ENMG and thermography tests.
Participants selected for the present study were included based on
having idiopathic carpal tunnel syndrome with a clear indication
for surgical treatment. Specifically, eligibility for surgical
intervention was determined by criteria including the presence of
idiopathic bilateral CTS and electroneuromyography (ENMG)
indicating mild or moderate impairment in one of the hands,
according to Stevens’ (1997) criteria.
The statistical program SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Sciences
version 22) was used to analyze the data in which frequencies,
means and standard deviations were calculated for each variable.
Anthropometric data was assessed for normality using the Shapiro-
Wilk test. For normal data, the difference between the study and
control groups was checked using the student's t-test for
independent samples and, for data with no normal distribution, the
Mann-Whitney test. The chi-square test (Fisher's exact test) was
used for categorical data. A 95% confidence interval and 5%
significance level (p<0.05) were used for all tests.
Study Development
ENMG was used to capture neuromuscular activity and a FLIR®
T540 camera was used to record thermographic images (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Thermographic imaging equipment (Camera FLIR®
T540).
[image]
Open in a new tab
The patients remained in an orthostatic position for 20 minutes to
become acclimatized before commencing the measurements. This
position was chosen to achieve balance in skin temperature and the
patients positioned in an elongated state.
All measurements were carried out in a room with controlled
environment, temperature set at 22 ± 2°C. The data was acquired
and analyzed using FLIR Tools+ software, which assessed the
average temperature of the region of interest (ROI). This average
ROI temperature was obtained from both upper limbs separately
and the maximum and minimum temperatures were analyzed using
the sof