
Materials and Methods
Proteomics Data Set
To demonstrate the capabilities of our proteogenomics pipeline, we
applied it to the human testis tissue data set published by Zhang
and colleagues.10 We will refer to this as the “C-HPP testis” data
set. The data set contains three biological replicates, each
fractionated using two different protein separation methods (regular
SDS-PAGE and tricine-SDS-PAGE), with six samples in total. Each
sample gave rise to 28 (regular) and 22 (tricine) fractions,
respectively, which were digested using trypsin and analyzed on an
LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer,
acquiring fragment ion (MS2) spectra using CID activation. We
downloaded the 150 RAW files from these liquid chromatography–
tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) runs from the PRIDE
repository11 (accession PXD002179) and converted them to mzML
format, extracting only the MS2 scans, using the “msconvert”
program from the ProteoWizard software suite12 (version
3.0.8789). A single RAW file was renamed to fit the naming scheme
of the remaining files (“CHPP_Testis_tricine_1010.raw” to
“CHPP_TESTIS_Tricine_1010.raw”). Another file,
“CHPP_SDS_3003.raw”, turned out to be corrupt, so we downloaded
the corresponding MGF file from PRIDE and converted that to
mzML. The mzML files were then used as inputs for our OpenMS
pipeline.
Sequence Database
The amino acid sequence database against which fragment ion
(MS2) spectra are matched is critical for comprehensive
identification of peptides. A sequence database for use with our
pipeline should consist of four parts: (1) known protein-coding
sequences; (2) sequences of common contaminants; (3) prospective
protein sequences currently unannotated or presumed noncoding
that could potentially contain unrecognized coding regions (e.g.,
lncRNA transcripts, RNA-Seq models, predicted transcripts, etc.);
and (4) decoy sequences. The four parts are concatenated into a
single sequence database that is used for database searching of MS2
spectra; parts 1–3 are also used individually to filter the
downstream search results. When analyzing data with the aim of
finding “novel” peptides, we are interested in high-confidence
matches to peptides that are in part 3 of the database but are not
also in parts 1 or 2.
For the analysis of the C-HPP testis data, we used the sequence
database from Wright et al.2 This database consists of human
translated amino acid sequences from the following sources. For
part 1, it contains the translated CDS from GENCODE13 v20 and the
UniProt14 reference proteome. For part 2, it contains the collection
of common contaminant proteins from the Max Planck Institute of
Biochemistry, together with sequences of the major
histocompatibility complex from the IPD-IMGT/HLA database.15
For part 3, it contains noncoding sequences from GENCODE v20
(pseudogenes, lncRNA, 5′ UTR), gene predictions from
AUGUSTUS,16 pseudogene predictions from Pseudogene.org,17 and
three-frame translated transcripts from three different large-scale
RNA-Seq experiments.13,18,19 For part 4, it contains randomized
decoy sequences generated from parts 1–3 using the Mimic software
(https://github.com/percolator/mimic). To simplify dealing with
the isobaric amino acids leucine and isoleucine, all occurrences of
“I” in the sequences were replaced by “L”. In total, the database
contains 8 406 627 entries; the FASTA file takes up 1.1 GB of
memory (including accessions).
Software
Our data analysis pipeline leverages many existing software tools.
We used TOPP tools20 from the OpenMS framework (version 2.0.1;
http://openms.org) for most data-processing steps, although in
some areas we extended the functionality offered by OpenMS (see
below). Importantly, OpenMS provides an easy-to-use graphical
interface for designing and running TOPP-based data analysis
workflows, called TOPPAS.21 It also offers a mechanism for
wrapping non-TOPP command line applications so that they can be
included in TOPPAS workflows (“GenericWrapper”).
Central to any proteomics analysis pipeline is the identification of
peptides from the MS2 spectra, for which we used the database
search engines Mascot22 (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and MS-
GF+23 (version 10089). The following parameters were used with
both engines: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment
mass tolerance; trypsin cleavage with full specificity, allowing two
missed cleavages; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of
cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine,
deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, N-terminal acetylation,
and conversion to pyroglutamic acid of N-terminal glutamine and
glutamic acid.
We applied Percolator24 (revision “273ff55” from https://
github.com/percolator/percolator) for statistical evaluation and
rescoring of the search results (in the Mascot case via an adapted
MascotPercolator,8,9 version 2.16; http://www.sanger.ac.uk/
science/tools/mascotpercolator). To summarize the results of our
pipeline and visualize the data, we used the R software
environment for statistical computing (version 3.1.2).25
Results
Software Contributions
We were able to rely on existing applications for the construction of
our proteogenomic pipeline and for many of the data processing
tasks; however, for several tasks, we developed new tools or refined
and extended existing ones. We added wrappers for the search
engine MS-GF+23 and for the postprocessing tool Percolator24 to
OpenMS. In addition, we adapted several existing TOPP tools and
underlying OpenMS library classes, tailoring them for use in an
integrated pipeline and for the needs of proteogenomic data
analysis. We not only added missing functionality but in several
cases also improved the quality (and thus reliability and
maintainability) of the source code.
Adapter for the MS-GF+ Search Engine
OpenMS includes TOPP tools that serve as adapters to several
widely used database search engines (e.g., Mascot, OMSSA, and X!
Tandem). We developed a TOPP tool that wraps the newer search
engine MS-GF+ called MSGFPlusAdapter. The adapter takes as
input the location of the MS-GF+ Java package, a spectral data file
(mzML), a sequence database file (FASTA), and a number of search
parameters, including lists of desired fixed and variable
modifications. It creates a temporary file containing the user-
defined modifications in the format required by MS-GF+. A Java
process runs the MS-GF+ program, supplying search parameters
and input files. MS-GF+ performs the search and writes results into
an mzIdentML file. Because OpenMS internally still uses its own
format, idXML, for peptide and protein identification (ID) data, the
adapter can optionally convert the mzIdentML file to idXML once
the search is complete. This conversion was initially implemented
via an intermediary step in which a tabular text file is generated
from the mzIdentML file using a function of MS-GF+. Information
from this file is then used to fill internal data structures and, from
there, written out to idXML. Support for the mzIdentML format in
OpenMS has improved in the meantime, so it is now also possible to
convert the mzIdentML file to idXML directly. Irrespective of the
method used for the conversion, the adapter needs to look up
retention time (RT) values for peptide IDs in the spectral data. This
information is missing from the mzIdentML file generated by MS-
GF+, but it is vital for many downstream applications and analyses
in OpenMS. To support this, we developed two related classes for
the OpenMS C++ library, SpectrumLookup and
SpectrumMetaDataLookup, to handle the recurring task of looking
up spectra and their associated information based on different kinds
of spectral references (e.g., scan numbers). These classes have now
been broadly adopted in OpenMS.
Percolator Wrappers
Percolator is a tool for postprocessing peptide–pectrum matches
(PSMs) from sequence database searches of LC–MS/MS data.24 It
can improve the number of confident PSMs recovered from the data
by applying a semisupervised machine learning approach to
distinguish correct from incorrect PSMs. Percolator also calculates
statistically meaningful scores for PSMs, i.e., q values (a measure of
the false discovery rate, FDR) and posterior error probabilities
(PEP).26
Percolator for MS-GF+
To run Percolator on MS-GF+ search results, we created two
wrappers using the Generic-Wrapper mechanism provided by
OpenMS: one for the “msgf2pin” program packaged with
Percolator, which converts mzIdentML files generated by MS-GF+
to Percolator’s input format,27 and one for the Percolator
executable itself.
In addition, we implemented a parser for the output files produced
by Percolator. Percolator can generate results on the levels of PSMs,
peptides, or proteins. We implemented support for PSM-level output
