
Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software,
Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review
& editing
Find articles by Lixin Liu
1,†, Fangchen Hu
Fangchen Hu
2Zhangjiang Laboratory, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation,
Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Fangchen Hu
2,†, Jiayue Han
Jiayue Han
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition,
Investigation, Project administration, Supervision, Validation,
Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Jiayue Han
1,*, Jun Gou
Jun Gou
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
3Aviation Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Infrared
Detector, Luoyang 471099, China.
4Tianfu Jiangxi Laboratory, Chengdu 641419, China.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding
acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration,
Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing
- original draft, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Jun Gou
1,3,4,*, Peng Zou
Peng Zou
2Zhangjiang Laboratory, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Data curation, Software, Validation
Find articles by Peng Zou
2, Hang Yu
Hang Yu
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Validation
Find articles by Hang Yu
1, Meiyu He
Meiyu He
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Resources
Find articles by Meiyu He
1, Lei Guo
Lei Guo
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Software, Visualization
Find articles by Lei Guo
1, Yunlu Lian
Yunlu Lian
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Formal analysis
Find articles by Yunlu Lian
1, Wenjie Deng
Wenjie Deng
5Key Laboratory of Optoelectronics Technology Ministry of
Education Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of
Technology, Beijing 100124, China.
Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Writing - review &
editing
Find articles by Wenjie Deng
5, Fakun Wang
Fakun Wang
6Center for OptoElectronics and Biophotonics, School of Electrical &
Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 639798, Singapore.
Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Fakun Wang
6, Jingxuan Wei
Jingxuan Wei
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Jingxuan Wei
1, Xiaoyang Du
Xiaoyang Du
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Data curation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization
Find articles by Xiaoyang Du
1, Hongxi Zhou
Hongxi Zhou
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Hongxi Zhou
1, He Yu
He Yu
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Funding acquisition, Methodology, Visualization, Writing - original
draft, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by He Yu
1, Yadong Jiang
Yadong Jiang
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Yadong Jiang
1, Qi Jie Wang
Qi Jie Wang
6Center for OptoElectronics and Biophotonics, School of Electrical &
Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 639798, Singapore.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding
acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration,
Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing
- original draft, Writing - review & editing
Find articles by Qi Jie Wang
6,*, Jun Wang
Jun Wang
1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R.
China.
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Project
administration, Supervision, Visualization, Writing - review &
editing
Find articles by Jun Wang
1,*
•  Author information
•  Article notes
•  Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC13189105  PMID: 42160418
Abstract
Accurate visual sensing in extreme high-contrast lighting
environments is critical for emerging intelligent systems such as
autonomous vehicles, smart surveillance, and robotics. These
systems rely heavily on high dynamic range (HDR) imaging to
capture scenes with wide illumination variations. However, existing
HDR solutions primarily depend on computational algorithms or
hardware-intensive techniques such as multiexposure fusion or
mechanical modulation, which suffers from latency, motion
artifacts, high power consumption, and limited adaptability. Here,
we present a hardware-centric approach that realizes HDR
functionality directly into the photodetectors of a camera image
sensor. Our design leverages an engineered tunneling mechanism to
achieve bias-controllable, continuously tunable dynamic range
covering up to 150 dB. In real-world high-contrast autonomous
driving scenarios, this sensor-level HDR capability enables robust
object classification confidence score exceeding 91% across the
entire exposure scene. By shifting HDR processing to the sensor
front-end, our approach substantially reduces the computational
load, enabling system-level efficiency, speed, energy consumption,
and recognition reliability. This prototype paves the way for the
development of next-generation, compact, on-chip visual
preprocessing hardware for intelligent vision systems.
Tunneling photodiodes with bias adjustable and high dynamic
range achieve visual perception in high-contrast lighting scenes.
INTRODUCTION
High dynamic range (HDR) cameras, with HDR, superior color
reproduction, ability to adapt to complex environments, and
enhanced low-light performance (1, 2), are widely used in fields
such as security monitoring (3, 4), autonomous driving (5, 6),
medical imaging (7), and industrial inspection (8, 9). They also
show great potential in virtual reality and augmented reality (10,
11). High-quality images help users better perceive and understand
information in complex environments, enabling accurate decision-
making. However, HDR cameras still face technical challenges,
including processing speed, image noise and high computational
resource demands, particularly in real-time applications and large-
scale data processing.
Currently, the implementation of HDR cameras relies primarily on
both software and hardware (12–15). Software-based methods are
widely studied due to their low cost and high flexibility (16–18),
but they face challenges such as high computational resource
consumption, high latency, poor processing quality (under high
noise conditions) and complexity (19). In contrast, hardware
solutions can fundamentally address issues related to real-time
performance, image quality, and reliance on postprocessing (14).
Current hardware technologies include HDR image sensors (20–23),
lens (24), multiple exposure (25), and shutter control techniques
(26). HDR sensors capture images directly without additional
processing, but they are costly, noise-sensitive and their DR is still
limited by the physical properties of image sensor (27). Large-
aperture lenses can enhance image quality and reduce noise in low-
light conditions, while high-transmittance coatings effectively
suppress ghosting and flare, improving contrast. However,
computational optics limitations and high costs remain key
challenges (24, 28). Multiple exposure techniques capture details at
different exposure levels but are prone to motion artifacts in
dynamic scenes, and the composite of multiple images adds storage
pressure. Shutter control techniques can adjust exposure and
brightness, but frequent switching may lead to image instability or
blurring (29). In applications with high-speed requirements,
multiple exposure and shutter control techniques can introduce
delays and image blurring, which affects system decision-making
and control efficiency (30). Overall, HDR technology still faces
challenges related to image processing speed and real-time
feedback, especially in applications with stringent real-time
requirements (30).
Here, a tunneling photodiode with HDR, real-time performance and
reduced storage requirements is constructed using PbTe/AlOx/Si
heterostructures. By electrically tuning the tunneling effect, the
dynamic range (DR) can be continuously adjustable, with a HDR
covering 150 dB. Our device can switch between among
photovoltaic direct tunneling (PV + DT) mode, photoconductive
direct tunneling (PC + DT) mode and photoconductive Fowler-
Nordheim tunneling (PC + FNT) mode as needed, enabling
exposure-free capability for high-contrast scenes image. This special
function owns rapid mode switching feature, notably reducing
operating time and making it suitable for high-speed capture and
quick DR adjustments. In intelligent driving scenarios with high
contrast, simultaneously identifying multiple high-intensity targets
is particularly important. With this technology, the classification
confidence score of pedestrians and vehicles in exposure scenarios
can exceed 91%. Moreover, this bias control technology alleviates
the burden on backend H