
Methods
147 women and 152 men ≥40 years old were randomly selected
from the Nottingham KP and Related Health in the Community
(KPIC) cohort (n = 9506). The “normal” range was established
using the percentile method in 163 participants who had no KP and
no RKOA. Optimal (maximum sensitivity and specificity) and high
specificity (90%) cut-offs were established using receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis in a comparison between people
with both KP and RKOA and normal controls.
Results
Effusion and synovial hypertrophy differed by gender but not by
age or laterality, therefore gender-specific reference limits were
estimated. However, the “normal” ranges between men and women
were similar for effusion (0–10.3 mm vs 0–9.8 mm), but different
for synovial hypertrophy (0–6.8 mm vs 0–5.4 mm). Power Doppler
Signal (PDS) in the healthy controls was uncommon (1.2% in men
and 0.0% in women). The optimal cut-off was 7.4 mm for men and
5.3 mm for women for effusion, and 3.7 and 1.6 for hypertrophy
respectively. The high specificity cut-off was 8.9 for men and 7.8
for women for effusion, and 5.8 and 4.2 for hypertrophy
respectively.
Conclusions
US effusion and synovial hypertrophy but not PDS are common, but
differ by gender, in community-derived people without painful knee
OA. Currently used cut-offs for abnormality need reappraisal.
Keywords: Ultrasound, Ultrasonography, Knee pain, Osteoarthritis,
Synovitis
Introduction
Knee osteoarthritis (OA) is a major cause of chronic pain and
impaired function in older adults1, 2. Knee OA is a common
complex joint disorder that involves all joint tissues including
hyaline articular cartilage, fibrocartilaginous menisci, synovium,
bone, ligaments and muscle3, 4, 5. These pathological changes can
be detected using various imaging techniques such as radiographs,
ultrasound (US) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Because
people with knee OA show wide variability of presentation with
respect to compartmental involvement and degree of bony changes
and inflammation, it could prove possible to use modern imaging
techniques to identify potential subgroups/phenotypes in the
heterogeneous population of people with knee OA6.
US is a non-invasive imaging technique that is used commonly to
detect inflammatory changes in joints. It is relatively inexpensive,
widely available and has no radiation burden or contraindications7.
Over the last two decades a number of technical advances have
improved US imaging of joints and soft tissues, increasing its utility
for assessment of musculoskeletal conditions8. US detection of
synovial effusion and synovial hypertrophy in knees is more
sensitive than clinical examination9, 10, correlates well with
histological findings11, 12 and correlates well with MRI in
visualising effusion13, 14. However, evidence regarding “normal”
values for effusion and hypertrophy in the general population is
limited15. For example, the only study to provide reference values
for effusion was based on a group of healthy volunteers aged 20–60
years old (n = 102)16, which is a low age range for OA, and no
population studies have reported normal values for synovial
hypertrophy or prevalence of Power Doppler signal (PDS).
A few studies have attempted to identify an optimal threshold
(maximum sensitivity and maximum specificity) or scoring system
for US synovial changes (USSCs) in knee OA. For example, a
EULAR-ESCISIT multi-centre study involving 600 individuals with
knee OA tested different cut-offs of synovial hypertrophy (≥2 mm
or ≥4 mm) and effusion (≥4 mm) against radiographic severity
and knee effusion on clinical examination17. The diagnostic
accuracy of these cut-offs was low, and it was recommended that a
threshold of 4 mm be used for both features18. Two European
Multicentre Studies also found that thresholds varied depending
upon knee positioning. While Terslev et al.19 found the optimal cut-
off (maximum sensitivity and maximum specificity) for knee
effusion detected in the neutral position with quadriceps
contraction was 3.2 mm, Mandl et al.20 showed that the optimal
cut-off for effusion at 30 degrees of flexion was 3.6 mm. However,
the comparison in these studies was made between normal and
abnormal knees in people with knee OA or other rheumatic
conditions, hence the thresholds between knee OA and the general
population remain unknown. Furthermore, none of the existing
recommendations for scoring USSC have considered age, gender or
laterality. Interestingly, the EULAR-ESCISIT study in people with
knee OA noted that women had fewer joint effusions than men [OR
0.62, no confidence interval (CI) reported]18 but still recommended
the same threshold (4 mm) for men and women. Differences in joint
anatomy, physiology, pain perception and risk of incidence and
progression of OA between genders provides a clear physiological
basis for examining whether there is a difference in USSCs between
men and women21.
We therefore undertook this study in a random sample of
community-derived men and women aged over 40 years who are
participating in a prospective cohort22 to: [1] examine the normal
ranges of USSCs and their distributions by age, gender and laterality
in the healthy participants; and [2] establish optimal cut-offs for
symptomatic knee OA compared with healthy controls.
Methods
Participants for this cross sectional study were selected from the
Knee Pain and Related Health in the Community Study (KPIC)22, an
ongoing prospective cohort study in Nottingham, UK that included
at baseline 9506 men and women aged ≥40 years. For
convenience, participants for the KPIC were selected from the
primary care practices closest to Nottingham City Hospital. To
ensure that this set is representative of the whole population we
compared the five selected practices with the seven unselected
practices and the whole population and found no difference in
terms of age, gender and body mass index (BMI) (Appendix 1). In
selected practices 1662 participants replied to the follow-up
questionnaire, of them 1284 (763 women, 521 men) agreed to
receive information about further projects. They were stratified by
gender and a random sample was taken from each group regardless
of their KP/OA status (Fig. 1). The characteristics of participants
invited for the current study (n = 500), and those who did reply
(n = 360) are shown in Appendix 2, and characteristics of the final
sample (n = 299) are shown in Appendix 3.
Fig. 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Recruitment of participants in the “Knee synovial changes detected
by US in the general population: cross sectional study” (by the 28th
of November 2016).
Age, gender, height, weight and KP status were self-reported in the
postal questionnaire. Current KP was defined as pain on most days
of the past month23, 24 (later referred as KP).
Participants were invited to attend for clinical assessments,
including US and radiographs of both knees at Nottingham City
Hospital.
1.
US assessment
US examination was performed by two assessors (MH, AS), using
the Toshiba Aplio SSA-770A machine with a multi-frequency (7–
12 MHz) linear array transducer. The same equipment and software
were used throughout the study. The supra-patellar recess and
medial and lateral tibio-femoral spaces were assessed with knee
flexion of approximately 20–30°. USSCs were defined according to
OMERACT-7 definitions (Appendix 4)25. Depth of synovial
thickness (hypertrophy) and effusion were each measured on a
continuous scale at their maximal diameter in millimetres using the
longitudinal axis. PD assessment was focused on areas of synovial
hypertrophy and recorded as absent or present. All measurements
were made in real time. Only one value per joint was recorded for
each US feature (the maximum value across the three areas
scanned). The inter-observer and intra-observer reliability test
results were reported previously26.
2.
Radiographic knee OA (RKOA) assessment
Bilateral weight-bearing semi-flexed posterior–anterior tibio-
femoral views using a Rosenberg template and 30° flexion skyline
patello-femoral views were undertaken using standardised
protocols22. The Nottingham logically derived line drawing atlas
(LDLDA)27, 28 was used to score joint space narrowing (JSN) in
medial and lateral tibio-femoral and medial and lateral patello-
femoral articulations (each scored −1 to 5) and osteophytes (at
eight sites in the three compartments, each scored 0–5). The scores
for all three compartments, ignoring −1 values for JSN (i.e., joint
space widening), were summated as a global score for each knee.
Presence of RKOA was defined as definite JSN (grade ≥2) plus
definite osteophyte (grade ≥2) in any compartment (tibiofemoral
or patellofemoral). This definition of definite osteophyte and
definite narrowing accords with the pathological definition of OA
which requires both definite focal loss of hyaline cartilage and
definite associated bone change29. Symptomatic RKOA was defined
as current KP plus RKOA. Alternative definition of symptomatic
RKOA was as current KP plus Kellgren and Lawrence (K&L) grade
≥2 in any compartment30.
Statistical analysis
1.
Sample size
Sample size was calculated using the formula for a single cross-
sectional study31. A population-based study conducted by Abraham
et al.32 reported prevalence of US-detected effusion at 24%.
Therefore, sample size required for this cross sectional study is 280
assuming the error margin d = 3%. This number also corresponds
with the recommended minimum sample size for establishing
reference intervals (n = 120 per group)33.
2.
“Normal” range
The “normal” range was established in the healthy participants who
had no KP and no RKOA34. We used 0 as the low limit and 95th
percentile as the upper limit to define the normal range of US
effusion and synovial hypertrophy. The 95% CI for the upper limit
was calculated using the distribution-free method as data were not
normally distributed (Hahn and Meeker, 2011).
3.
Optimal threshold
The discrimination abil