
Methods
D3R 2016 challenge and test datasets
The D3R 2016 PL-2016-1 Challenge was based on the two datasets
provided by Barry Stoddard and David Baker. Each of these datasets
contained a series of closely related proteins (sequence identity
>90% within each series) artificially designed to bind a single
ligand, 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) or 25-
hydroxycholecalciferol (25-D3) respectively. Throughout the text,
we refer to the datasets using the names of the target ligands.
The 17-OHP binding dataset consisted of two protein-ligand co-
crystal structures: PL-2016-1-O-1 and PL-2016-1-O-2, resolved with
resolutions of 2.5 and 2.0 Angstrom, respectively, and provided to
the challenge participants with ligands removed. The goal of the
challenge was to predict the ligand binding poses for each of the
two protein-ligand complexes and rank proteins within this series
by their affinity to 17-OHP.
The 25-D3 binding dataset contained three protein-ligand co-crystal
structures referred as PL-2016-1-C-1, PL-2016-1-C-2 and PL-2016-1-
C-3, with resolutions of 1.9, 2.1 and 1.9 Angstrom and, again, with
ligands removed. Similarly to the previous case, the D3R challenge
participants were expected to predict the ligand binding pose for
each complex. The affinity prediction challenge, however, was
different: the goal was to predict the relative affinity of PL-2016-1-
C-1 to 25-D3 and its other ligand, vitamin D3.
Notably, for both datasets the water-mediated interactions were
assumed to play an important role, and the crystal structures
provided by the organizers included crystal waters. The ligands
were available in 2D representations as SDFiles, and, therefore, an
additional challenge was to correctly predict the puckers of
nonplanar rings for 17-OHP.
Up to 5 ligand poses per protein were allowed for submission in
each docking prediction. Affinity prediction was to be submitted as
absolute affinity in nM, as relative affinity, or as a simple ranking of
proteins by their affinity.
Docking and scoring protocol
The overall structure of the docking protocol is presented in Fig. 1.
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Ligand pose prediction protocol.
The whole protocol consisted of the 5 major steps:
First, multiple possible conformers of the ligand featuring various
possible torsion angle orientations and different nonplanar ring
puckers were generated. For this purpose we employed Confab - a
systematic generator of low energy conformers [10]. At the end of
this stage 10 lowest-energy conformers for 25-D3 and vitamin D
were retained for future processing. For 17-OHP only 5 low
conformers were generated, likely due to the rigidity of the
molecule.
Pre-generated conformers were then used as inputs for our FFT-
based rigid body global docking program PIPER [1]. Using an FFT-
based approach greatly accelerates the solution of the rigid body
search problem, and allows to perform global sampling of protein-
ligand interaction landscape in affordable time, evaluating billions
of putative protein-ligand orientations on a grid. Performing
docking of a rigid protein to multiple pre-generated ligand
conformers allowed to account for ligand flexibility within the FFT
based docking framework, similar in style to our recently developed
FFT based peptide docking protocol [9].
Docking of each ligand conformer constituted a single FFT docking
run; the resulting low-energy poses from different runs were merged
to form a pool of 1000 poses and then clustered together. Docking
poses serving as cluster centers were retained for later optimization
stages.
Rigid docking poses generated with FFT served as starting points for
an in-house Monte Carlo minimization algorithm [11–13]. Since all
proteins present in the two datasets had a large central cavity, in
each case such cavity was assumed to be the target binding site, and
thus only poses located within the cavity were further refined.
During the MCM stage, all ligand torsions were treated as rotatable,
except for those localized within closed rings. CHARMM19-based
energy function augmented with knowledge-based hydrogen
bonding and GBSA terms was used for scoring of generated
conformations as previously described in [12]. Each MCM trajectory
consisted of 10,000 Monte Carlo steps, and conformations
corresponding to all accepted moves were retained.
In the final stage of the docking pipeline, all accepted Monte Carlo
conformations were rescored with crystal waters using a Vina [14]
based energy function. Structural water molecules in the binding
site are known to mediate protein-ligand interactions, and correct
placement of waters was shown to improve the scoring of ligand
poses [15]. The minimization step in MCM drives ligands toward
local minima and greatly reduces the number of poses for rescoring.
Rescored poses were clustered with a 1.0 Angstrom RMSD cutoff
after which the lowest-energy poses from each cluster were
reported as final docking predictions. These final predictions were
ranked according to their Vina scores.
For the purpose of scoring in D3R, we simply used the Vina scoring
function of the top docking models.
FFT based rigid body docking
FFT docking was performed with PIPER [1] using a variation of the
protocol described previously [16]. In short, given a protein
receptor and a ligand conformer, we explore the full discretized
conformational space of receptor-ligand rigid body orientations
using the Fast Fourier Transform correlation approach. In the
process of sampling the protein remains fixed, while the ligand is
rotated and translated. Rotational degrees of freedom are sampled
from a semi-uniform set of 70,000 rotations constructed using
layered Sukharev grid sequence, and translations are sampled on a
3D grid with 1.0 Angstrom spacing.
The advantage of the FFT approach is that if the energy function is
written down as a sum of several correlation functions, then for a
single rotation of the ligand (or, in our case, ligand conformer),
energy values for all possible translations can be evaluated very
efficiently using P forward and one inverse Fourier transforms,
where P is the number of correlation terms in the energy function.
Thus if N denotes the size of translation grid in each dimension,
then the complexity of the FFT approach per one rotation is 0
(N3ln(N)), as opposed to 0(N6) for the direct approach. In PIPER,
the FFT calculations are repeated for all 70,000 rotations of the
ligand, and a single lowest-energy pose is retained for each rotation,
resulting in a total of 70,000 low energy poses.
For the purpose of small molecule docking, we use an energy
function composed of attractive (Eattr) and repulsive (Erep) Van der
Waals contributions, as well as an electrostatic term with Born
correction (Eelec) [17]: E = Evdw + w2Eelec. Here individual terms
are computed as:
Evdw=Eattr+w1Erep,Eelec=∑i∑jqiqjr2+D2exp(-r2/D2),
where r is the distance between atoms i,j and D is an Born radius.
For consistency, we use a standard set of weights previously
developed for protein docking applications: w1 = 1, w2 = 750.
When docking the D3R targets, a separate docking run was
performed for each ligand conformer, resulting in 10 docking runs
for for each target from the 25-D3 dataset and 5 docking runs for
those from the 17-OHP dataset. An equal number (100 for 25-D3
dataset targets and 200 for 17-OHP) of lowest-energy poses from
each run were taken to form a pool of 1000 poses, which were then
clustered together with a clustering radius of 1.0 Angstrom and
cluster centers of the 10 largest clusters retained as final FFT
docking models.
Monte Carlo Minimization refinement
For the purpose of flexible docking pose optimization, we have
updated the Monte Carlo minimization (MCM) package previously
developed in our lab for protein docking refinement[11–13], with
capabilities for sampling ligand torsional degrees of freedom.
Additionally the algorithm provides full support for sampling ligand
rigid body degrees of freedom, and allows for side-chain flexibility
on the receptor side. Random moves are coupled with fast local
minimization of the generated poses carried out using a manifold-
based optimization algorithm. In the latest version of the code, our
previously reported custom energy function [12] and Vina [14]
energy function can be used for pose evaluation, and pose
acceptance is guided by a Metropolis criterion. Here we provide a
brief overview of the major algorithmic features of our MCM
package.
In our approach, the treatment of ligand flexibility is based on the
common assumption that the changes in covalent bond-lengths and
bond-angles can be neglected. In this context, the whole ligand can
be viewed as a set of rigid molecular clusters (aromatic rings,
methyl groups, etc.) interconnected by rotatable bonds. The only
internal degrees of freedom of the ligand are, therefore, associated
with torsional moves around such rotatable bonds, and description
of the ligand as a whole can be given in terms of 6 rigid body and d
torsional degrees of freedom, where d is the number of torsions.
Overall, such ligand representation is typical for small molecule
docking methods (e.g. [14, 18]. To correctly handle the changes in
the molecule upon torsional moves, we employ a torsion tree data
structure as described in previous work [13].
An interesting observation that comes from representing molecular
configurations in terms of rigid body orientations and torsions is the
fact that the underlying space of such representation is, a manifold,
