
Methods
We performed a cross-sectional and longitudinal observational
analysis in people aged 40 years or more, recruited from the knee
pain and related health in the community cohort study. The
primary exposure was the Sleep Problems Index II score in tertiles
measured at baseline. The primary outcome was count of chronic
conditions developed in 5 years. Pain, low mood, and anxiety were
measured at 2 years as mediators. Poisson regression was used to
calculate adjusted relative risk and 95% confidence intervals.
Results
We included 4488 participants in the cross-sectional analysis at
baseline and 1941 in the 5-year longitudinal analysis. At baseline,
the adjusted relative risks for prevalent multimorbidity were 1
(reference) for tertile 1, 1.09 (95% confidence interval; 1.01–1.18)
for tertile 2, and 1.21 (95% confidence interval; 1.11–1.32) for
tertile 3 of the sleep disturbance score (p for trend <.001). Of the
total association between sleep disturbance and multimorbidity, 14
per cent (95% confidence interval; 9% to 19%) were mediated by
pain and 7 per cent (95% confidence interval; 2% to 13%) by low
mood. In the 5 year follow-up, the adjusted relative risk for incident
multimorbidity were 1 (reference) for tertile 1, 1.12 (95%
confidence interval; 0.98–1.28) for tertile 2, and 1.25 (95%
confidence interval; 1.06–1.47) for tertile 3 (p for trend .007). Of
the total association between sleep disturbance and multimorbidity,
10 per cent (95% confidence interval; 2% to 18%) was mediated by
pain.
Conclusions
Sleep disturbance is associated with multimorbidity. The association
is dose-dependent, temporal, and partially mediated by pain.
Statement of Significance
Sleep disturbance has been hypothesized to be a risk factor for the
development of multimorbidity. We investigated this association
using data from participants aged 40 and over in the knee pain and
related health in the community cohort. We found that sleep
disturbance is indeed associated with both prevalent and incident
multimorbidity. The association is dose-dependent and temporal,
and partly mediated by pain.
Keywords: KPIC, sleep disturbance, multimorbidity, longitudinal
Introduction
The growing impacts of multiple long-term health conditions within
the same individual, i.e. multimorbidity, are concerning for both
patients and the healthcare providers. DuGoff et al. [1] found that
people aged over 67 years old with 10 or more long-term health
conditions live on average 18 years less than similar individuals
without any long-term health conditions, and that life expectancy
decreased as the number of conditions increased. A systematic
review in 2021 found that individuals with 7–9 long-term
conditions cost the healthcare system 3.82 (95% CI; 3.01–4.85)
times more than individuals without multiple long-term conditions
[2], and a Finnish study found that patients classed as “multimorbid
at risk” accounted for 62 per cent of total healthcare costs [3].
Therefore, interventions to reduce the incidence of multimorbidity
should reduce the number of consultations, hospitalizations, and
healthcare costs.
Sleep disturbance can be defined as the total accumulation of sleep-
specific traits that interfere with an individual’s ability to get
restful, restorative sleep that allows them to remain active while
awake. It has been associated with multimorbidity, but the
temporal association with this outcome is unclear [4]. However,
sleep disturbance is associated with chronic pain, depression, and
anxiety [5], which in turn are associated with multimorbidity [6–
9], and some of these associations are likely causal [10].
The relationship between sleep disturbance and pain is
bidirectional, with pain disrupting sleep but good or poor sleep
being associated with improvements or worsening of pain [11].
There is robust evidence that interventions to improve sleep have
moderate to large effects on sleep symptoms with some functional
benefits but relatively small benefits for the other symptoms of
depression, anxiety, and other mental disorders [12–14]. However,
there may be a subgroup of people with depression who derive
deeper benefit for their depression with treatments for insomnia,
though the clinical characteristics and underlying pathophysiology
of this important subgroup are yet to be clearly defined [14]. In
contrast, interventions for insomnia in people with pain improve
not only sleep disturbance but also pain and depression, although
the effects on anxiety are inconsistent [15, 16]. These studies
suggest that sleep disturbance is a key factor in the network of long-
term health conditions. However, whether sleep disturbance is
directly associated with multimorbidity, or indirectly through pain,
depression, or anxiety has not been fully investigated.
To address this gap, we undertook this study to investigate whether
sleep disturbance is associated with current multimorbidity and
whether it can predict incident multimorbidity prospectively. Given
that sleep disturbance is associated with pain, depression, and
anxiety, it is possible that these conditions could be confounding
variables between sleep disturbance and multimorbidity. However,
it is also possible that sleep disturbance is associated with these
conditions, which in turn leads to multimorbidity. Therefore, we
also investigated whether any of the associations we found between
sleep disturbance and multimorbidity are mediated by multisite
chronic pain, low mood, and anxiety.
Materials and Methods
This study was approved by the Nottingham Research Ethics
Committee 1 (NREC reference 14/EM/0015).
Study design
We carried out a cross-sectional and longitudinal study using data
obtained from participants in the knee pain and related health in
the community (KPIC) cohort. KPIC was a cohort study designed
primarily to investigate prevalence and incidence of knee pain and
its related health conditions among people aged 40 and over around
the city of Nottingham. As a result, data for knee pain and its
related health conditions have been collected, which provided an
excellent opportunity to study multimorbidity. Between March 14
and December 1, 2014, 40 505 questionnaires were sent to all men
and women (irrespective of having knee pain) over the age of 40
who were registered at 12 general practices in the East Midlands in
England, of whom 9514 returned the questionnaire [17, 18]. The
cohort was assessed at three waves (wave 1 [2014–2015], wave 2
[2017], and wave 3 [2020]). Long-term conditions at wave 1 were
accumulated to calculate the multimorbidity score for the cross-
sectional analysis at wave 1 and to identify participants at risk for
incident multimorbidity during the follow-up for the longitudinal
analysis (Fig. 1).
Figure 1.
[image]
Open in a new tab
Selection of participants.
Exposure
For our primary exposure of sleep disturbance, we used the Sleep
Problems Index II score based on 9 out of 12 questions from the
MOS (Medical Outcome Study) scale, with higher values meaning
increasing levels of sleep disturbances [19]. Sleep Problems Index II
mainly focusses on difficulty falling asleep, restless sleep, tiredness
during the day, problems breathing during sleep, and self-reported
dissatisfaction with sleep. The answers, initially scored from 1 to 5
or 1 to 6, were then transformed into a scale from 0 to 100, and the
final value of the score is the average value (0–100) of all 9
questions [19]. To investigate the relationship between sleep
disturbance and multimorbidity in a clinically meaningful manner,
we divided the wave 1 participants into three groups based on the
tertiles of the Sleep Problems Index II score: tertile 1 (T1, <20.6),
tertile 2 (T2, >20.6 and <37.8), and tertile 3 (T3, >37.8), such
that the higher the sleep tertile, the greater the level of sleep
disturbance. This is a standard way of transforming a continuous
exposure when measuring its association with a non-continuous
outcome.
Outcome
For our primary outcome, we used a multimorbidity count based on
a list of 38 common health conditions previously used for KPIC
research [18], specifically: joint pain (cause unspecified), spinal
problems, liver, and gallbladder disorders, psoriasis, migraines,
neurological disorders, psychological problems, vitamin D
deficiency, coeliac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, lymphatic system disorders,
