
Methods
Adults with and without diabetes were recruited from a research
clinic. Non-specialist healthcare workers received brief training to
capture macular- and optic-disc-centred retinal images using an AI-
assisted handheld retinal imaging camera (Remidio FOP NM-10),
before and after mydriasis. The device generated reports identifying
referrable DR. Participants also had visual acuity assessed and
underwent slit lamp biomicroscopy by an ophthalmologist. We
evaluated image gradability of the captured images pre- and post-
dilation, as well as the DTA of the AI reports using the
ophthalmologist’s findings as the gold-standard.
Results
Retinal images were captured on both eyes of 119 participants,
including 49 with diabetes. The proportion of participants that had
ungradable images of at least one eye prior to mydriasis was 46.2%,
and this fell to 15.1% after mydriasis. A higher percentage of older
individuals (59% of those aged 55–64 years and 70% of those aged
65–74 years), 85% of those with cataracts and 58% of those with
poor visual acuity had at least one eye with ungradable images pre-
mydriasis, with these percentages reducing by 40–70% with
mydriasis. The sensitivity and specificity for referral of patients
compared to the gold-standard was 73.3% and 79.8% respectively,
with image gradability a major driver of misclassification.
Conclusions
The AI-assisted retinal imaging camera used by non-specialist
healthcare workers after minimal training, in a low-resource setting
shows promise as a feasible tool to identify DR in dilated eyes.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at
10.1186/s44263-026-00279-6.
Keywords: Diabetic retinopathy, Diabetes, Screening, Sri Lanka, AI,
Fundoscopy
Background
Globally, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is high and rising across
all regions. An estimated 589 million adults aged 20–79 years
worldwide (11.1% of all adults in this age group) have diabetes [1].
Over the past decade, the burden of diabetes, measured by
disability-adjusted life years, has risen faster in low- and middle-
income countries (LMICs) than in high-income countries [2].
With the increasing prevalence of diabetes, there is a concurrent
increase in complications of diabetes [3]. One such complication is
diabetic retinopathy (DR), an important cause of preventable
blindness, which, when treated early, can greatly improve quality of
life [4]. Globally, 1.9% of moderate or severe visual impairment
and 2.6% of blindness in 2010 were due to DR [5] with 22% of
people with diabetes mellitus estimated to have DR [6].
Furthermore, DR is the largest cause of preventable blindness in
working-age adults [7] leading to visual impairment, poor quality
of life, and low levels of psychosocial well-being.
Studies such as the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study
(ETDRS) [8] have shown promising results that early detection and
treatment of DR, and effective control of diabetes can make
blindness from DR almost entirely preventable. However, systematic
screening for DR proves to be a significant challenge, particularly in
LMICs, due to limited resources and infrastructure [9].
The Sri Lanka Health and Ageing Study (SLHAS) found that Sri
Lanka has one of the highest prevalences of diabetes in the world,
at 23% of adults aged 18 years and above [10]. A small number of
studies, none nationally representative [11–13], suggest that the
prevalence of DR in Sri Lankan people with diabetes is about 27%–
53%, and the prevalence of sight-threatening diabetic retinopathy is
about 4%.
The local reference standard for DR screening is retinal screening
with dilated fundoscopy [14]. In practice, people with diabetes
receiving treatment in larger, tertiary-level public health facilities
are often referred to eye clinics for screening at the time of
diagnosis of diabetes. At the primary care level, people with
diabetes are referred for DR screening to consultant eye surgeons or
other primary screeners (physicians trained in ophthalmology).
However, Sri Lanka has few ophthalmologists–only 5 per million
population compared to and average of 11 in the eight South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries [15].
A survey conducted in the Western Province reported that, although
there was adequate capacity to deliver eye care services and
conduct a DR screening program, human resources, and
infrastructure distribution were not properly aligned to the
population’s need, resulting in the lack of a systematic DR screening
program [16]. Another study conducted in the Western Province
estimated that annual diabetic eye screening visits cover only 17%
of people with diabetes and that only 11% of people with diabetes
who are likely to need photocoagulation therapy receive it [17].
Barriers to accessing the existing DR screening services were
multifactorial and included institutional factors, with overcrowded
clinics, long waiting times, and poor organisation of care, resulting
in poor patient experience [18]. The ability to screen for DR in a
way convenient to patients can greatly improve the impact of
screening programs [7].
Diabetic retinopathy screening could potentially be increased using
retinal imaging devices with in-built automatic interpretation to
detect diabetic retinopathy, particularly if they can be used
effectively by non-specialist healthcare workers, the typical cadre at
primary and secondary healthcare facilities. Early detection would
facilitate healthcare workers to triage people for further
examination and treatment by ophthalmologists. One such device is
the Remidio Fundus on Phone Non Mydriatic-10 (Remidio FOP
NM-10), which is a low-cost smartphone-enabled retinal imaging
system that utilizes precision optics to illuminate and capture
retinal images [19]. The integrated artificial intelligence (AI)
system included in the smartphone allows the capturing of high-
quality retinal images with a 45º Field of View, and automatic
detection of diabetic retinopathy and glaucoma.
This study was a pilot to inform the design of clinical protocols for
a subsequent multi-centre study, DIAGNOSE-Diabetic Retinopathy
(DIAGNOSE-DR). DIAGNOSE-DR aims to test the use of a digital
retinal camera with AI interpretation in low-resource clinic settings,
operated by non-specialist healthcare staff, in Sri Lanka.
DIAGNOSE-DR also aims to assess the prevalence of DR in Sri
Lanka. This pilot study was registered on Open Science Framework
(10.17605/OSF.IO/EN5RU) [20]. The aim of the pilot study was to
test one such digital retinal camera—the Remidio FOP NM-10
device—in a clinic setting, assessing its use by non-specialist
workers with a healthcare background, and assessing the need for
mydriasis in capturing images, thereby informing the design for the
multi-centre study.
The objectives of this paper are to (1) calculate the proportion of
participants and eyes for which gradable images are captured pre-
and post-dilation; (2) compare the gradability of retinal images
captured pre- and post-mydriasis; (3) identify any associations
between the gradability of images and characteristics of participants
or image capturers; (4) assess the Diagnostic Test Accuracy (DTA)
of the Remidio FOP NM-10 generated AI report for diabetic
retinopathy after dilation compared to slit lamp biomicroscopy by
an ophthalmologist; and (5) review discrepancies between the slit
lamp biomicroscopy and AI report for all eyes where gradable
images were captured.
Methods
The study was a non-randomized single-centre, cross-sectional
feasibility study conducted at the Eye Care Centre, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Colombo, in Sri Lanka. This clinic conducts
community eye care services, education, and research projects
under the management of its Director, a consultant ophthalmologist
(MMD).
Study procedure
Participants
Patients aged 18 years and above who are registered at the Eye
Care Centre (ECC), Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo,
were recruited. Two groups of participants were recruited, with and
without diabetes, with a target of at least 50 participants in each
group. A participant was classified as a person with diabetes, if they
had a previous diagnosis of type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus on
medical records (typically a clinic book or medical notes brought by
participants) and had been diagnosed with diabetes for at least
three months. For the sample of people without diabetes,
participants must report no known history of diabetes, nor have any
diagnosis of diabetes on available medical records. The DIAGNOSE-
DR project includes individuals without diabetes to enable
estimation of baseline retinopathy prevalence, which is done in DR
prevalence studies [21]. Including individuals without diabetes in
this pilot study therefore allows feasibility to be assessed in this
group, who will be included in the main DIAGNOSE-DR study
alongside individuals with diabetes. All participants provided
informed written consent, which was obtained by trained research
staff under the supervision of investigators (MMD, SS, NW). People
with mental or cognitive impairment who could not give informed
consent, and pregnant women were excluded, the latter because of
the need for mydriasis. People who could not safely have their eyes
dilated (history of acute angle closure glaucoma, hypersensitivity to
mydriatic eye drops, using eye drops for glaucoma, penetrating eye
injury in past six months, self-driving or other activity after
dilatation), and people with apparent eye infections were excluded
for safety reasons.
Image capturers and training
Non-specialist healthcare workers were recruited to capture images.
While junior or undergraduate doctors and nurses, health
promotion graduates and biomedical science graduates were
eligible, three main categories of image capturers were utilized;
medical students, medical graduates and non-medical graduates.
