
Methods
This study was a feasibility non-randomised trial, with embedded
process evaluation. Parents/caregivers of a child (up to 12 years
old) were recruited by Local Authority or independent provider
research sites and self-selected remote or face-to-face delivery of the
Group Triple P intervention. Data were collected at baseline and
16 weeks follow-up. The following feasibility outcomes were
assessed: site recruitment, participant recruitment rates and
retention at the 16-week follow-up, intervention adherence, fidelity
and reach, feasibility of trial processes and outcome measures
(including resource use, cost and health-related quality of life) and
Local Authority and independent service provider willingness to
participate in a definitive trial.
Results
All sites utilised a multi-point participant recruitment strategy,
relying on existing pathways to identify families. Only two sites
reached participant recruitment targets. Participants’ self-selected
remote delivery (23 participants) or face-to-face delivery (19
participants) and baseline demographics, except for education level,
were balanced across arms. A 66.7% retention rate was observed at
16 weeks. Most trial processes were acceptable to participants and
site staff. However, randomisation was not considered acceptable to
site staff or 37.5% of participants, due to the removal of participant
choice. The intervention was delivered to high fidelity, except for
some intervention adaptations. Participant engagement in the
remote arm was hampered by inconsistent use of cameras and little
interaction between parents and facilitators.
Conclusions
A number of barriers to using a randomised trial design were
identified. Ongoing research should consider a potential non-
randomised definitive trial to assess the use of remotely delivered
group-based parenting interventions and to overcome these
barriers.
Trial registration
ISRCTN81494090, 19/09/2023.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at
10.1186/s40814-026-01861-3.
Keywords: Group Triple P, Feasibility, Trial, Parenting,
Intervention, Remote delivery
Key messages
•  The evidence on the effectiveness of remotely delivered
group-based parenting programmes, such as Group Triple P,
compared to face-to-face programmes, is inconclusive.
•  Remote delivery of the Group Triple P parenting intervention
was generally feasible and acceptable to both parents/
caregivers and programme delivery staff: however, reduced
group engagement was observed.
•  It would not be feasible to include individual randomisation
in a future definitive trial in this trial setting/population, but
other non-randomised trial designs should be considered.
Background
Parents play a key role in the health and wellbeing of families.
Family relationships are critical to children’s social and emotional
development and longer-term outcomes [1, 2]. Parents’ own health
and wellbeing is important and in turn shapes the quality of
parenting and family relationships [3, 4]. Supporting parents is
therefore a major public health priority. Many well-designed
parenting interventions have demonstrated effectiveness in
strengthening parenting behaviours, improving parent–child
relationships and reducing child behaviour problems and prevent
poor parent mental health [5]. Furthermore, the Triple P parenting
programmes have be shown to have beneficial impact on parenting
practices, parenting satisfaction and efficacy, parental adjustment
and parental relationship [6] A significant proportion of these
interventions are delivered to groups of parents who meet face-to-
face, with a practitioner (or team of practitioners) over several
weeks. Learning comes from the materials delivered by practitioners
and the interaction between participants as they work with this
material [7].
Several challenges related to the implementation of group-based
parenting interventions have been identified. A longstanding issue
is participant recruitment and retention [8, 9], particularly
underserved groups such as fathers [10, 11] and ethnic minority
populations [12]. Practical barriers to attendance, including work
commitments and travel, have been highlighted as significant [13,
14]. Psychological barriers may also arise, such as discomfort in
group settings or concerns about being judged on one’s parenting
[13].
The COVID pandemic necessitated a rapid transfer of group-based
parenting interventions to remote delivery using online
videoconferencing platforms, such as Microsoft (MS) Teams and
Zoom. Post-pandemic, use of remote delivery has continued and has
been integrated into the routine practice of many providers. There
is growing interest in whether remote delivery might address key
challenges experienced by face-to-face group-based interventions,
including recruitment and retention of underserved groups, and
reducing practical and psychological barriers to attendance.
However, it is also important to consider how with the move to
remote delivery it may be possible to avoid inadvertently
generating new forms of inequality including those driven by digital
poverty.
Research on the adaptation of group-based parenting interventions
for remote delivery and their subsequent implementation is still
limited [15, 16], but a number of studies have demonstrated
feasibility and acceptability [17–19]. For example,
Papakonstantinou Rodi, et al. [19] explored practitioners’
experience of remote delivery of the Stepping Stones Group Triple P
intervention. Overall, remote delivery achieved good acceptability
(among parents and practitioners), allowing scarce resources to be
‘stretched’ (due to lower running costs), and the opportunity for
staff to gain new skills. However, a recent systematic review found
that many studies reported poorly on the adaptations made for
remote delivery and gave little detail on how implementation
fidelity was measured or maintained [17].
One of the key potential benefits of remote delivery is that it offers
participants flexibility and convenience, reducing barriers to
attendance [15, 18], including removing the need to travel to
meeting venues. Some studies have found that remote delivery
achieves high rates of participation (compared with face-to-face
delivery) [19, 20]. However, evidence on the extent to which it
addresses recruitment challenges (particularly among underserved
groups) is limited and mixed. Whilst McDevitt [21] found that
remote delivery increased reach within remote and underserved
communities, other researchers have reported broadly analogous
demographic participant profiles when implemented alongside face-
to-face provision of the same intervention [22, 23]. There is a
paucity of evidence on whether remote delivery achieves higher
participation rates among fathers and members of ethnic minority
groups.
In some cases, remote delivery has encountered continued barriers
to engagement, including participants’ variable access to stable
internet connections and suitable digital devices [17, 20]. Another
identified barrier to increasing participant diversity is meeting the
needs of individuals whose primary language differs from the one
used to deliver the intervention, and how best to provide real time
interpretation.
The evidence on the effectiveness of remotely delivered group-
based parenting programmes remains inconclusive, including in
comparison with face-to-face formats [17, 24]. Papakonstantinou et
al. (2024) found that practitioners perceived remote delivery as
matching the effectiveness of face-to-face and believed that most
participants preferred the former. A common theme across studies is
that whilst practitioners were able to deliver key content and
interact with participants, it was often challenging to promote
group interaction and learning (which have been identified as
important intervention mechanisms) [15, 19, 20]. For instance,
Canário et al. [15] reported difficulties in recreating role plays by
parent dyads, and Cook et al. [20] describe challenges with
promoting learning between participants.
Provision of group-based parenting programmes for remote delivery
therefore offers significant promise in terms of acceptability and
feasibility. In addition, reach of underserved populations, including
diverse ethnic groups and fathers, may improve by increasing
accessibility of the intervention. However, research is still limited
on the implementation of remotely delivered interventions and their
effectiveness on key outcomes [15, 17, 22, 24]. There is uncertainty
concerning the extent to which remote delivery addresses
participant engagement and reach (and in what contexts). Few
studies have explored how to manage group interaction and
cohesion [15] and the implications for intervention mechanisms.
The Group Triple P intervention is implemented face-to-face and
remotely by Local Authorities and independent providers and is
therefore a good candidate to explore the feasibility of
implementing both a remotely and face-to-face delivered parenting
intervention in a trial context.
Methods
Aim and objectives
The aim of the trial was to assess the feasibility of delivering the
Group Triple P intervention to parents/caregivers of young children
(0–12 years) by Local Authority or independent service provider
organisations. The feasibility trial was designed to inform a
potential, definitive trial of the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of Group Triple P delivered remotely compared to face-to-face
delivery.
The main objectives were to assess (1) the feasibility of recruiting
suitable sites (Local Authority and independent service provider
organisations); (2) the feasibility of recruiting eligible participants
to the trial; (3) retention through the 16-week follow-up data
collection; (4) the acceptability of trial processes, including
randomisation, to site staff, practitioners and parents/caregivers;
