
Materials and methods
Participants
Fourteen test subjects (age: 36.2 ± 10.7, nine females, five males)
participated in Experiment 1. Of these, 11 (age 38.2 ± 11.7) also
completed Experiment 2. All subjects had normal or corrected-to-
normal vision (Snellen acuity better than “6/6”). The recording
quality of the applied pVOG depended largely on the pupil margin
not covered by the eyelid. Therefore, only subjects who opened
their eyes wide enough and had good control over their blink reflex
were recruited. All participants were recruited from the employees
of the University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians University
Munich and gave their written informed consent. The experimental
procedure was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and
was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of the
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich (280–10).
Apparatus
Eye movements were recorded with a binocular video-based head-
mounted pupil tracker (Schneider et al., 2009) running at a
frequency of 220 Hz. Each eye was recorded by its own camera. The
optical path of the camera was directed at the eye via a semi-
transparent mirror at an angle of about 30 degrees from below. This
system (EyeSeeCam®, EyeSeeTec GmbH, Munich, Germany)
evaluated, for each eye and for each sample, the pupil position in
the image coordinates of the cameras at a resolution of about
0.01 deg (specification of the manufacturer, defined as RMS eye
position during steady fixation after subtraction of a linear fit). In
the fixation intervals of the current study, the median [IQR] of the
RMS sample-to-sample difference of the unfiltered eye position data
was 0.0254 [0.0130] deg in the horizontal and 0.0250 [0.0310] deg
in the vertical direction. For each image frame, the EyeSeeCam®
also provided the ellipse parameters of the pupil image (orientation
and length of the two main axes). Only the ellipse parameters of the
left eye were recorded. The system marked full blinks by missing
values in the eye position traces.
Visual stimulation was presented on a video monitor (ASUS 278H;
size: 59.8 × 33.6 cm; resolution: 1920 × 1080; frame rate: 100 Hz;
viewing distance: 128 cm). Graphics were generated by a GeForce
GTX 960 (EVGA, Brea, CA, USA) graphics card installed in a
separate Linux PC (openSUSE 13.1). A custom-written C program
using the OpenGL libraries controlled the graphics card.
To enable monocular viewing conditions during calibration, the
graphics computer also controlled a pair of shutter glasses (PLATO,
Translucent Technologies, Ontario, Canada). These were attached to
the eye-tracking device’s mounting frame and positioned about
5 cm in front of the eyes (out of the cameras’ optical path). The size
of the field of view through the shutter glasses was 55 × 55 deg.
The graphics computer controlled the shutters via the parallel port
(IEEE 1284).
The raw signals of eye position, pupil parameters, visual stimulus,
and shutter glasses were synchronized by online transmission via a
private network to a central recording computer running under a
real-time operating system. (QNX, Ottawa, Ontario, CA). The two
different sampling rates of the pupil tracker and the stimulus
generator were mapped to a common data rate of 1 kHz using
linear interpolation.
The monitor was the only light source in the experimental room.
The head position was stabilized by a chin rest adjusted
individually to align the midpoint between the two eyes with the
center of the screen. Participants were instructed to keep their
heads as still as possible throughout the session and not to touch
the head mount of the pupil tracker. This instruction was also
explicitly given for the short breaks (duration: 15 s) between the
calibration paradigm and the subsequent fixation block.
Calibration paradigm
The eye position signals were calibrated based on the pupil
positions in the camera image, expressed in pixels, as provided by
the EyeSeeCam® without using the pupil tracker’s built-in
calibration software. The fixation targets were presented to each
eye under monocular viewing conditions. To estimate the
calibration’s dependence on pupil diameter, two calibration
functions were created for each eye: one for a darker background
(10 cd/m2) and one for a lighter background (200 cd/m2). In
