
Method
1. Introduction
Image registration (also known as image alignment, warping, or
matching) is an important task in medical image analysis [1]. It is
used in computer aided diagnosis and clinical population studies. A
comprehensive overview can be found in [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 1]. The
process of image registration involves finding transformations that
relate spatial information conveyed in one image to those in
another [8]. We illustrate this in Figure 1. In mathematical terms,
we are given two images m0(x) (the template image) and m1(x) (the
reference image; here, x∈Ω⊂ℝ3), we seek a spatial transformation
y:ℝ3→ℝ3,x↦y(x), such that the deformed template image m0(y(x))
is similar to m1(x) [5]. Registration methods can be classified
according to the parameterization for y. In this paper, we consider
methods that belong or are related to large-deformation
diffeomorphic metric mapping (LDDMM) [9, 10]. In the original
LDDMM formulation, the map y is parameterized by a time-
dependent velocity field v, modeled through the ordinary
differential equation dty = v(y). In our formulation, we model the
deformation through a hyperbolic transport equation; the map y
does not appear explicitly (see §2.1). Such mappings parameterized
through a velocity field v provide maximal flexibility [1]. LDDMM
maps are expensive to compute since they are infinite-dimensional.
Upon discretization, the number of unknowns of our problem is still
in the millions even if we restrict ourselves to stationary velocity
fields v(x)∈ℝ3: For each grid point of the discretized domain Ω, we
seek a vector in ℝ3. Consequently, solving a problem for two
images of resolution 2563 requires us to find the vector entries of v
for 2563 grid points, which results in ≈50 M unknowns (three
unknowns per grid point). Furthermore, LDDMM registration is a
highly non-linear and ill-conditioned inverse problem [7]. As a
result, image registration can take a few minutes on multi-core
high-end CPUs. As large clinical, cross-center, population-study
workflows require thousands of registrations, reducing the compute
time of a single registration to seconds translates to a reduction of
clinical study time from weeks to a few days. GPUs with their
inherent parallelism and low energy consumption are an attractive
choice to achieve this goal. However, despite the need for high-
througput computational performance for registration, and the
existence of several software libraries for LDDMM registration,
there is little work on highly optimized GPU implementations (see
§1.3 below).
Figure 1:
[image]
Open in a new tab
Illustration of the image registration problem. Panel (A): Volume
rendering of exemplary 3D input data. Panel (B): Image registration
is the process of establishing spatial correspondences between two
views of the same object. These sought-after correspondences y are
indicated by the red arrows for some exemplary points within an
axial slice of the template and reference imaging data shown in
panel (A). Prior to executing CLAIRE, we correct for the global
misalignment between the considered data (i.e., an affine
transformation). In panel (C), we show an axial slice of the volume
visualized in panel (A) after an affine pre-alignment step has been
performed; we execute CLAIRE on this data. Panel (D): The output
of CLAIRE is a deformation map y, more precisely, a
diffeomorphism, that relates each point in the template image m0 to
its corresponding point in the reference image m1. We show a
typical deformation map y in the leftmost image, and the associated
determinant of the deformation gradient (encodes volume change)
in the second and third image from the left (axial and coronal slice).
In CLAIRE, we do not directly invert for the deformation map y but
for a stationary velocity field v that parameterizes y (second and
third figure from the right; color denotes orientation). The last
figure in panel (D) shows the point-wise residual after applying
CLAIRE.
1.1. Contributions
Based on the open source diffeomorphic image registration
framework CLAIRE [11, 12, 13, 14, 15], we introduce a new,
optimized, GPU implementation of LDDMM registration. The
overall mathematical formulation and solution strategy remains
unaltered from [14]. In our past work, we demonstrated that the
main computational kernels of CLAIRE–interpolation and
differentiation—take up 90% of the runtime of the CPU version of
CLAIRE [16, 13, 14]. To address this, we propose several
modifications of the differentiation and interpolation kernels. More
specifically, our contributions are:
•  Interpolation: The first important computational kernel is
scattered-data interpolation used for semi-Lagrangian
advection. CLAIRE originally employed a Lagrange-basis
cubic interpolation. We study several alternative methods on
GPUs using a combination of pre-filtering, texture, and
polynomial interpolation. We study their accuracy and
performance using simple performance models and vendor
performance profiling tools in §3.
•  Differentiation: The second important computational kernel
is computing derivatives (gradient and divergence) of 3D
images (scalar fields). CLAIRE in its original version used
FFTs to calculate all derivatives and their inverse in the
reduced gradient and in the forward and adjoint PDE systems.
We introduce a mixed-precision implementation using 8th
order finite-difference (FD8) kernels to replace FFT-based
spectral derivatives. In particular, we replace all first order
derivatives that appear in the partial differential equations
(PDE) of our optimality systems. Note that FFTs are still
retained for higher-order derivatives and their inverse. We
discuss this in detail in §3.
•  Evaluation: We evaluate the new algorithm on four
exemplary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans and for
three different image resolutions. We compare the proposed
method with the original CLAIRE in §4 as well as with the
GPU packages PyCA [17] and deformetrica [18, 19]. The
focus of this study is not to provide a complete benchmark for
registration accuracy of CLAIRE. It is to establish a baseline to
compare our improved solver to our prior work and the work
of other groups. Overall, we will see that our method is over
20× faster than the original CPU-based CLAIRE and produces
registration maps of similar quality. This speedup does not
only reflect hardware differences but mostly algorithmic
changes, some of which could also be implemented in a CPU
version. Furthermore, reducing the accuracy of certain
calculations to exploit hardware acceleration has no negative
effects on the quality of the registration.
1.2. Limitations
The original implementation of CLAIRE was built to support the
Message Passing Interface (MPI) for parallelism [13, 14, 16]. Our
proposed adaption for GPUs has not been integrated with MPI yet.
This will be subject to future work, in particular the integration of
the high-speed GPU interface NVLink in a multi-node multi-GPU
context. Thus, our solver does not scale to the image sizes that can
be handled by CLAIRE. However, this is not an issue for clinical
images since typical image sizes fit in a single GPU1. CLAIRE
currently only supports periodic boundary conditions. Most medical
imaging data is embedded into a zero background and therefore
naturally periodic. If the data is not periodic, it can be mollified. If
effects of boundary conditions on the computed solution are of
concern, the data can be embedded into a larger domain.
1.3. Related Work
We refer to [1, 5, 6, 7] for recent developments in image
registration. Surveys of GPU accelerated solvers can be found in
[20, 21, 22]. As mentioned above, this work extends CLAIRE [14,
15, 12, 16]. Popular (in clinical studies) software packages for
deformable registration are IRTK [23], elastix [24], NiftyReg [25],
and FAIR [6]. GPU implementations of (low-dimensional)
parametric approaches are described in [25, 26, 27, 28]. Fast GPU
implementations of (high-dimensional) nonparametric formulations
available in FAIR are presented in [29, 30]. Unlike CLAIRE, these
methods do not guarantee that the computed map y is a
diffeomorphism. One possibility to safeguard against non-
diffeomorphic maps y is by augmenting the formulation by hard
and/or soft constraints on y [31], which introduces significant
algorithmic complications. Another approach to enable
diffeomorphic registration is to parametrize y via a smooth time-
dependent velocity field v [32, 33]. This approach has been termed
LDDMM [9]. The formulation in CLAIRE is closely related to
LDDMM. A key difference is that LDDMM is based on non-
stationary (time-dependent) v but CLAIRE uses stationary v.
Moreover, in the original formulation, the map y appears explicitly.
In our work, we eliminate y and model the deformation using a
transport equation (see §2.1; the work in [11, 34] and establishes a
connection to LDDMM [9]).
Other approaches that use stationary v are described in [35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 40]. There exists a large body of literature on LDDMM-type
approaches that, in many cases, mostly focuses on theoretical
considerations [10, 33, 41, 42, 43]. There is much less work on the
design of efficient solvers; examples are [9, 36, 40, 44, 45, 46, 47,
48, 49]. Popular software packages for LDDMM are diffeomorphic
Demons [40], ANTs [45,50], DARTEL [36], deformetrica [18, 19,
51, 52], and PyCA [17].
Before we discuss available GPU implementations in more detail,
we note that the runtimes reported below are included to put our
work into perspective. In general, numerous implementation aspects
and settings such as complexity of the computational kernels,
programming languages, employed optimization algorithms, used
tolerances, computational accuracy, considered hardware, and even
varying input data (complexity of the problem) will have an effect
on the runtime. This is why we include our own experiments for
software of other groups (see §4.2.2).
A GPU implementation of the diffeomorphic Demons algorithm is
