>Methods   This section is divided into three parts. First, we describe the OP‐MEG system. Second, we summarize the experimental procedures for cerebellar activity measurement. Finally, we introduce the inversion scheme used to localize the source activity.   Ethical approval   The study conformed to the standards set by the  Declaration of Helsinki , except for registration in a database. The protocol was approved by the University of Nottingham Medical School Research Ethics Committee and the University of Birmingham Research Ethics Committee. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. The experiments took place at the University of Nottingham. Participants   Three healthy subjects (1 female, 2 male) aged 27–50, with no history of psychiatric or neurological diseases, participated in the study. All subjects were naïve to the eyeblink conditioning. OP‐MEG system   The OP‐MEG system has been previously described in detail (Boto  et al .  2017 ,  2018 ; Holmes  et al .  2018 ; Tierney  et al .  2018 ). Briefly, the system consists of an OPM sensor array within a customized cast of the head, and a field‐nulling apparatus comprising four reference OPM sensors and field‐nulling coils (Fig.  1 ).   Figure 1. Experimental set‐up ( A ) and schematic illustration ( B ) of the eyeblink paradigm for cerebellar activity measurement.     Open in a new tab   The participant is seated inside a magnetically shielded room (MSR) wearing a customized scanner‐cast. Air‐puffs are delivered to the outer canthus of the participant's left eye via a nozzle. OPM sensors are inserted into slots covering the cerebellum and right somatosensory cortex. Two more sensors are placed in bilateral infra‐orbital slots to measure eyeblinks. Field‐nulling coils standing either side of the participant carry currents set so as to minimize the residual magnetic field in the MSR, which is measured by 4 reference OPMs prior to scanning. The task‐controlling laptop, located outside the MSR, sends synchronizing triggers that are recorded by the data acquisition PC during scanning. [Color figure can be viewed at  wileyonlinelibrary.com ] Optically pumped magnetometer   The OPM sensors used here (QuSpin Inc., Louisville, CO, USA) have previously been described in detail (Shah & Wakai,  2013 ; Osborne  et al .  2018 ). In brief, each OPM sensor incorporates three key components: a 795 nm wavelength laser, a 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3  cell containing rubidium‐87 ( 87 Rb) vapour, and a photodiode. The laser spin‐polarizes the  87 Rb atoms in the direction of the laser beam. The photodiode perceives the intensity of the laser transmitting through the cell. At zero magnetic field, the cell is transparent to the laser light and the photodiode detects a maximal signal. A small local field (due to brain activity) causes Larmor procession of the  87 Rb atoms, which decreases the transparency of the cell because some laser light is absorbed by the atoms. The output of the photodiode shows a zero‐field resonance with Lorentzian line shape, allowing the measurement of the field (Dupont‐Roc  et al .  1969 ). In practice, the sensors have a bandwidth of approximately 0–130 Hz with a noise level of ∼15 fT/√Hz in the 1–100 Hz band, and a dynamic range of ±1.5 nT.   Each OPM sensor also contains a set of three coils which generate three orthogonal fields to cancel out the static field inside the vapour cell up to ∼50 nT. These on‐sensor coils compensate the ambient environmental field in a typical magnetic shield room (MSR) and allow sensors to operate at a fixed position and orientation. To keep the OPMs within their dynamic range during naturalistic movement, we further apply an array of bi‐planar coils to null the residual field inside the MSR (see the field nulling apparatus section). Field nulling apparatus   The earth's residual static field in the Nottingham MSR is ∼25 nT with a maximal gradient of approximately 10 nT/m. This means that even minimal head movements (e.g. a 4‐degree rotation) can easily generate signals which exceed the OPM's dynamic range. In order to mitigate these effects, we used a set of bi‐planar coils to generate magnetic fields which counteract the remaining static field as measured by four reference sensors close to the head. By applying this method, the dominant components of the static field and field gradient can be diminished by factors of 46 and 13, respectively, in a volume of 40 × 40 × 40 cm 3  encapsulating the head (Boto  et al .  2018 ; Holmes  et al .  2018 ). Helmet design   Data from an anatomical T1‐weighted MRI scan were used to generate a 3D mesh representing the outer surface of each participant's scalp. This 3D mesh was used in 3D printing to shape the inner surface of a nylon ‘scanner‐cast’, as described (Boto  et al .  2017 ; Meyer  et al .  2017 ; Tierney  et al .  2018 ), with sockets around the outer surface to hold the OPM sensors. Importantly, the mesh and subsequently produced wearable helmet provide accurate socket and thus sensor positions and orientations, which are in the same coordinate space as the MRI image. Therefore, no coregistration is needed and the sensor positions are defined as the centre of the socket bases with a 6.5 mm offset, which takes into account the distance between the outside of the sensor housing and the centre of the vapour cell (Osborne  et al .  2018 ). Here, with limited numbers of sensors available, we placed the sensors proximal to the cerebellar and somatosensory cortices. Figure  1  shows the sensor configuration in a typical subject. Across the three participants, 13–19 posterior sensors and 4–6 somatosensory sensors were used. Additionally, two sensors were placed in bilateral infra‐orbital slots for eye‐blink detection (Fig.  1   A ). Experiment: eyeblink paradigm   Eyeblinks were elicited by a 32 ms air‐puff delivered through a nozzle mounted on the scanner‐cast (Fig.  1   A ), essentially a pressurized air cylinder (1 bar) fed into a 10 m semi‐rigid plastic tube (2 mm internal diameter), under the control of a bespoke pneumatic valve controller. Some details of the pneumatic delivery system are given in Leonardelli  et al . ( 2015 ). The nozzle directed the air‐puff to the outer canthus of the left eye from a distance of approximately 2–4 cm, individually adjusted to evoke a visible blink after each delivery, but without discomfort. The arrival time of the air‐puff was calibrated off‐line using a microphone and was relatively insensitive to the distance of the nozzle over a limited range (∼1 ms/cm). Subjects received four contiguous 12 min blocks of stimulation. To equate the task to the baseline phase of a previously validated eyeblink conditioning paradigm (Cheng  et al .  2008 ), each block constituted 200 trials: 140 trials of air‐puffs, 50 trials of a 550 ms binaural tone (2800 Hz) and 10 paired trials with the tone co‐terminated with air‐puff delivery; trial order was randomized in sets of 20. A total of 600 air‐puff trials were recorded per subject. Every trial began with a random wait of 1–2.5 s to avoid habituation and anticipation; inter‐stimulus intervals averaged to 3.6 s.   To understand the relationship between neck muscle and OP‐MEG activity, two additional blocks, with surface electromyography (EMG) recorded by MEG‐compatible electrodes available on the CTF275 MEG in the Nottingham MSR, were administered in one subject (subject 3) on a separate day. EMG electrode pairs were placed over the bilateral cervical splenius capitis (SPL), the primary muscles activated during neck extension, based on Sommerich  et al . ( 2000 ). Eleven posterior OPM sensors were used in this recording. OP‐MEG data collection   The OP‐MEG data were digitized at a sampling rate of 1200 Hz, using a 16‐bit digital acquisition (DAQ) system (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) controlled by custom‐written software in LabVIEW (National Instruments). The air‐puff trigger signals were also acquired through the same DAQ system and sent to both the OPM and CTF MEG (during sessions with concurrent EMG) data acquisition PCs to synchronize air‐puff triggers, OP‐MEG and EMG data. Data analysis   All of the data analysis was performed using SPM12 within the MATLAB environment (Release 2014b, The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA).   OP‐MEG data pre‐processing   OP‐MEG data were filtered between 5 and 80 Hz (or 0–200 Hz for eyeblink analysis, explained in more detail below) and each trial epoched between −1000 and +1000 ms relative to air‐puff onset. Because OPMs are configured as magnetometers (as distinct from gradiometers which are used in many cryogenic MEG systems), they are susceptible to increased environmental interference. We mitigated interference by constructing virtual gradiometers, which linearly regress the signal recorded by the reference array from the signal recorded at the scalp array (Fife  et al .  1999 ; Boto  et al .  2017 ). Thereafter, data were concatenated across blocks and all trials of data were ranked according to signal variance. Trials with variances higher than [median + 3 × median absolute deviation] were rejected (Leys  et al .  2013 ). For the evoked response analysis, the remaining trials (548, 588 and 585 trials with air‐puff stimulation, for subject 1, 2 and 3 respectively) were baseline corrected to the mean of the window 50 ms prior to stimulus onset and then averaged. Subject‐specific early and late peaks were identified through global field power amplitudes. Paired Student's  t  test was used to analyse the changes of amplitudes between baseline and evoked responses;  P  < 0.05 was considered significant. Spectral analysis   For induced spectral power changes, single trial time–frequency (TF) decompositions in sensor space were calculated for each subject using a Morlet wavelet transform (Tallon‐Baudry  et al .  1998 ) and then averaged across trials and the power of the evoked responses subtracted out. The wavelet transform was calculated for each time point between −1000 and +1000 ms, with 76 scale bins corresponding to frequencies between 5 and 80 Hz. For each trial and frequency, the mean power of the interval from 50 ms before stimulus onset until stimulus presentation was considered as a baseline level. The power change in each frequency band post‐stimulus was expressed as the relative percentage change from the pre‐stimulus baseline. Eyeblink detection   We identified eyeblink responses from the infra‐orbital OPM sensors using the following pipeline: we began with data filtered between 0 and 200 Hz. First, a notch filter at 50 Hz was applied to remove power line noise. Second, a high pass filter at 25 Hz and then a low pass filter at 80 Hz were used. Thereafter, we performed full wave rectification and a final low pass filtering at 20 Hz. A blink peak was identified by the highest amplitude in a trial. For data presentation only, we averaged across 10 consecutive trials. EMG data analysis   EMG Data were high‐passed filtered at 40 Hz and rectified. Data were then epoched and concatenated as had been performed for the OP‐MEG data. Both average waveforms and time–frequency decompositions were examined and compared with OP‐MEG data. Comparing OP‐MEG to eyeblink and EMG data   We examined the trial‐by‐trial temporal correspondence between the activity of OP‐MEG and non‐neural electrical sources, including eyeblinks and muscle potentials, using Pearson's  r ‐values (Yuval‐Greenberg  et al .  2008 ). The latency of the maximal power of 5–80 Hz OP‐MEG time–frequency spectrum was computed for each trial and then correlated with peak blink latency. The relationships between OP‐MEG and EMG peak latencies as well as amplitudes were also determined. In addition, EMG and OP‐MEG trials were sorted in order of the latency of peak EMG, to further inspect the connection between these two types of data. OP‐MEG source localization   We evaluated the locus of the average evoked response using a dipole fit analysis and the induced power change using a beamformer. In both cases the volume conductor model was the Nolte single shell model (Nolte,  2003 ), implemented in SPM12, using the scalp boundary from the individual T1‐weighted MRI.   Dipole fitting   We reconstructed sources of the evoked field data for each subject using the SPM implementation of equivalent current dipole fitting (Kiebel  et al .  2008 ). In brief, the inversion scheme assigned initial means and variances of dipole positions and moments (also called ‘priors’). The final dipole locations and moments were optimized using variational free energy (Friston  et al .  2007 ; Penny,  2012 ; López  et al .  2014 ). Free energy quantifies a model's ability to explain the same data (by maximizing the likelihood, similar to other dipole fitting routines) while penalizing excessive optimization (heuristically speaking, a complexity penalty). Moreover, models in which the sources have different prior locations can be compared using free energy. This is particularly useful for comparing different anatomical models of the same data (e.g. is the source more likely to have arisen from the cerebellum or the neck muscles?)   We specified the initial mean locations of six single dipole models based on the literature: (1) right somatosensory cortex (S1), face area, (2) left S1, face area (Nevalainen  et al .  2006 ), (3) right cerebellum (in lobule VI), (4) left cerebellum, lobule VI (Cheng  et al .  2008 ), (5) right and (6) left medial parieto‐occipital areas. Model 5 and 6 were used because these areas are not only spatially close to the cerebellum but also known to present blink‐related activity (Bardouille  et al .  2006 ; Liu  et al .  2017 ). We also tested if the evoked responses might have originated from non‐neural sources (i.e. posterior neck muscles) using two additional initial mean locations at the right and left posterior neck. The standard deviation of each prior dipole location was set to 10 mm; the mean and standard deviation of each prior moment were assigned as 0 and 10 nA m, respectively. To avoid local maxima, 50 iterations, with starting locations and orientations (i.e. the means and standard deviations of prior locations and moments) randomly sampled from prior distributions, were carried out for each model in each subject (50 × 6 = 300 iterations in each subject). For each subject, we used the model parameters corresponding to the highest free energy value across all iterations. The maximal free energy values were then averaged across subjects. Beamforming   We used the scalar version of a linear constrained minimum variance beamformer algorithm implemented in the DAISS toolbox for SPM ( https://github.com/spm/DAiSS ) to localize the source of induced spectral power changes. Two different covariance windows were chosen according to observed sensor level responses (Fig.  4 ). We first used a covariance window of 5–80 Hz and a time window of −50 to +125 ms and contrasted the 75–125 ms post‐stimulus period with a pre‐stimulus period between −50 and 0 ms. Second, we used a covariance window of 5–30 Hz and a time window spanning −400 to +900 ms and contrasted an individually based 400 ms post‐stimulus peak power period with a pre‐stimulus baseline between −400 and 0 ms. The regularization rate λ was set to be 0 (i.e. unregularized) (Barnes  et al .  2004 ). The source orientation was set in the direction of maximal power. The reconstruction grid spacing was 10 mm.   Figure 4. Time–frequency spectrograms showing induced power changes to air‐puff stimulation.     Open in a new tab     A , each subject's average across all trials at the two sensors with the maximal power changes.  B , the positions of these sensors marked as coloured circles for each subject and mapped onto the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template brain. Two types of enhanced activity can be observed: (1) a transient broadband response peaking at ∼100 ms (left column) and (2) increased power at 10–30 Hz (alpha and beta range) occurring during a 100–900 ms time window with individual latency differences (right column). Results   Sensor level responses   We looked at the average evoked response to air‐puff stimulation from the cerebellar OPM sensors and from the sensors positioned over the contralateral somatosensory cortex. Figure  2   A  shows the average evoked response measured in posterior sensors (left sensors: blue dotted curves, right sensors: orange continuous curves) for the three subjects. Two main peaks were observed across subjects at around 50–60 ms and 85–115 ms. The field patterns observed at these peaks were qualitatively dipolar (Fig.  2   A  middle panel). For both early and late responses, a paired  t  test showed that peak field strengths were significantly different from those during the baseline time windows in the majority of sensors (for subject 1, 16/19 channels for the early peak, 11/19 for the late peak; for subject 2, 15/18 and 12/18, respectively, and for subject 3, 8/13 for both early and late peaks). There was a slight latency difference (approx. 2 ms on average) between positive and negative going extrema (e.g. subject 2, Fig.  2   A  upper panel), indicating a more complex source distribution. This small offset was not considered when statistically comparing the peak field strengths. We also observed two response peaks from sensors close to the primary somatosensory cortex (anterior sensors: green continuous curves, posterior: blue dashed curves, Fig.  2   B ). For each subject, the earliest distinct somatosensory evoked response peaked at 40–50 ms post‐stimulus, compatible with the p45m response to facial tactile stimuli (Nevalainen  et al .  2006 ).   Figure 2. Sensor‐level evoked and blink responses following air‐puff stimulation.     Open in a new tab     A , upper panel: air‐puff evoked responses over the cerebellar sensor array for 3 subjects. Each trace corresponds to the average signal for one sensor over the posterior cranium, situated left (blue dotted curves) and right (orange continuous curves) of the midline respectively. Middle panel: field maps of the evoked field at the latencies of the two distinct peaks. On the field maps, all sensors at which the response was statistically significant are displayed (black circles). Statistical significance was assessed with paired  t  test comparing mean amplitudes between peak latency ±2 ms and baseline (−4 ms to 0 ms relative to air‐puff contact,  P  < 0.05). The positions of the sensors with the highest activity are highlighted with their channel numbers. Note different sensor layout for each subject. Lower panel: the bar graphs and error bars display the mean field strengths and 95% confidence intervals of the early and late peaks. For each response, the two sensors showing the highest positive and negative activity are displayed.  B , sensor‐level evoked responses over the right (i.e. contralateral) somatosensory area (anterior and posterior sensors as green continuous and blue dashed curves, respectively).  C , the average blink waveform obtained from the infra‐orbital sensor, constituting of a single component peaking later than 100 ms. Note the time courses of somatosensory and infraorbital waveforms are distinctly different from those observed at posterior sensors. The latency and shape of the blink trace recorded from infra‐orbital sensors were dissimilar to the cerebellar evoked responses (Fig.  2   C ). Although the late peak of the OP‐MEG evoked responses (Fig.  3   A  upper, 86 ms) was temporally close to average EMG activity peak (Fig.  3   A  lower, 93 ms), several other features of cerebellar evoked responses were clearly different from muscle activity. We sorted trials by the latency of peak EMG and showed that peak EMG latencies (Fig.  3   B , left panel) were approximately uniformly distributed across the epoch. The EMG peaks seemed to temporally correlate with enhanced negativity of the OP‐MEG, regardless of the polarity of the evoked response, in some sensors (6 out of 11, two examples shown in Fig.  3   B , middle and right panels). For example, peak EMG coupled with increased negativity in both OPM channel 1 and 2 (Fig.  3   B , middle and right panels), while their evoked responses were opposite in polarity (Fig.  3   A , upper panel). Importantly, the EMG–MEG correspondence was only observable outside the time window of evoked responses (i.e. before air‐puff stimulation and after 150 ms). We correlated EMG and OP‐MEG (negative) peak latencies separately for trials with EMG peaking before and after 150 ms. We found only trials peaking after 150 ms had a significant but weak correlation (Fig.  3   C ; trials with EMG peaking after 150 ms:  r  = 0.19,  P  = 0.01; trials peaking before 150 ms:  r  = 0.12,  P  = 0.16). No correlation between EMG and OP‐MEG amplitude was found at the latency of the late evoked component ( r  = −0.06,  P  = 0.30) (Fig.  3   D ).   Figure 3. Comparing cerebellar MEG evoked responses with neck EMG data.     Open in a new tab     A , comparison of the average posterior waveforms (upper) and rectified EMG (lower) of subject 3: on average, EMG activity peaks (93 ms) later than the evoked responses of OP‐MEG, though close to the late component (86 ms). Note that the OP‐MEG evoked responses appear before 150 ms.  B , EMG and OP‐MEG trials sorted by the latency of peak EMG activation, subject 3. The colour scale represents the amplitude of EMG and OP‐MEG. Peak EMG latencies (left panel) were approximately uniformly distributed across the epoch. Although the MEG negativity peak seems to temporally correlate with the peak EMG in some sensors (6 out of 11, 2 examples shown here), this correspondence is only observable outside the time window of evoked responses (i.e. before air‐puff stimulation and after 150 ms, see bent arrows).  C , we performed correlation of latencies separately on trials with EMG peaking before and after 1