>Methods   Participants   In Experiment 1, 22 participants (13 females, 9 males; median age 22 years; range 19–33 years) were recruited from a paid participant pool and reimbursed at AUD$20/hr. In Experiment 2, 23 participants (14 females, 9 males; median age 23 years; range 19–33 years old) were recruited from the same pool and reimbursed at the same rate. Each person provided written informed consent prior to participation and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The study was approved by The University of Queensland Human Research Ethics Committee and was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Experimental setup   Both experiments were conducted inside a dimly illuminated room. The items were displayed on a 22-inch LED monitor (resolution 1920 × 1080 pixels, refresh rate 100 Hz) using the PsychToolbox presentation software for MATLAB 50 , 51 . In Experiment 1, participants were seated at a distance of approximately 45 cm from the monitor. In Experiment 2, the same viewing distance was maintained using a chinrest to minimise head motion artefacts in the EEG. At a viewing distance of 45 cm, the monitor subtended 61.18º × 36.87º (one pixel = 2.4′ × 2.4′). Task   A schematic of the task is shown in Fig.  1 . Supplementary Movie  1  shows two example trials. Each trial began with a central fixation point and the RSVP stream commenced after 300 ms. The stream consisted of 20 Gabors (0.71° standard deviation, ~5° diameter, 100% contrast, centred at fixation) on a mid-grey background. On each trial, the orientations of the twenty Gabors in the stream were drawn pseudo-randomly, without replacement, from integer values ranging from 0–179°. Both targets and distractors were drawn from the same random distribution, meaning there was no restriction on the relationship between targets (except they could not be identical). Note the uncorrelated nature of the targets means the design controls for possible repetition blindness effects 52 , since the targets were equally likely to be similar in orientation as they were to be maximally dissimilar (i.e., orthogonal), and thus any potential orientation-specific effects would cancel out across trials.   Each item was presented for 40 ms and was separated from the next item by a blank interval of 80 ms, yielding an 8.33 Hz presentation rate. The participants’ task was to reproduce the orientations of the two high-spatial-frequency Gabors (targets; 2 c/°) while ignoring the items of a low-spatial frequency (distractors; 1 c/°). Between 4 and 8 distractors, varied pseudo-randomly on each trial, were presented before the first target (T1) to minimise the development of strong temporal expectations, which can reduce the AB 40 , 53 . The number of distractor items between T1 and T2 defined the inter-target lag (1,2,3,5,7 in Experiment 1, and 3,7 in Experiment 2). There were 600 trials in each of the two experiments, with an equal distribution of trials across the lag conditions (120 in Experiment 1, 300 in Experiment 2), with fewer lags included in Experiment 2 to increase signal to noise for the regression-based EEG analysis. In Experiment 2, we selected Lag 3 as the test condition for the AB because it yielded a significant reduction in T2 response accuracy compared with T1 in Experiment 1, and because it has been widely used in previous studies of the AB 24 , 39 , 40 , 54 – 57 .   Participants were asked to monitor the central RSVP stream until the presentation of the last Gabor, after which a response screen appeared (see Fig.  1b ). The response screen consisted of a centrally presented black circle (10° diameter) and a yellow line. Participants rotated the line using a computer mouse to match the perceived orientation of the target and clicked to indicate their desired response. They were asked to reproduce the orientations of the two targets (T1, T2) in the order they were presented, and to respond as accurately as possible, with no time limit. After providing their responses, participants were shown a feedback screen which displayed their orientation judgements for T1 and T2, and the actual orientations of both targets (see Fig.  1c ). The feedback was displayed for 500 ms before the next trial began, and participants were given a self-paced rest break every 40 trials. Each experiment took between 50 and 60 min to complete. EEG acquisition and pre-processing   In Experiment 2, continuous EEG data were recorded using a BioSemi Active Two system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, Netherlands). The signal was digitised at 1024 Hz sampling rate with a 24-bit A/D conversion. The 64 active scalp Ag/AgCl electrodes were arranged according to the international standard 10–20 system for electrode placement 58  using a nylon head cap. As per BioSemi system design, the common mode sense and driven right leg electrodes served as the ground, and all scalp electrodes were referenced to the common mode sense during recording. Pairs of flat Ag-AgCl electro-oculographic electrodes were placed on the outside of both eyes, and above and below the left eye, to record horizontal and vertical eye movements, respectively.   Offline EEG pre-processing was performed using EEGLAB 59  in accordance with best practice procedures 60 , 61 . The data were initially down sampled to 512 Hz and subjected to a 0.5 Hz high-pass filter to remove slow baseline drifts. Electrical line noise was removed using the  clean_line , and  clean_rawdata  functions in EEGLAB was used to remove bad channels (identified using Artifact Subspace Reconstruction), which were then interpolated from the neighbouring electrodes. Data were then re-referenced to the common average before being epoched into segments for each trial (−0.5 s to 3.0 s relative to the first Gabor in the RSVP). Systematic artefacts from eye blinks, movements and muscle activity were identified using semi-automated procedures in the SASICA toolbox 62  and regressed out of the signal. The data were then baseline corrected to the mean average EEG activity from 500 to 0 ms before the first Gabor in the trial. Behavioural analysis   To determine how the AB affected participants’ perception of targets, for each trial we found the difference between the actual target orientation and the reported orientation (i.e., the orientation error) for T1 and T2. This approach is analogous to one employed in previous work that examined whether the AB is associated with discrete or graded awareness of T2 30 . The continuous nature of the orientation responses given by participants on each trial raises the challenge of distinguishing “correct” and “incorrect” trials. For Experiment 2, we scored trials as correct when the orientation error was less than 30° from the presented orientation; trials were scored as incorrect when the orientation error was greater than 30°. As shown in Supplementary Fig.  5 , this approach to scoring yielded a classic blink effect, suggesting the task captures the important behavioural features of the widely reported AB phenomenon. For each lag condition, we found the proportion of responses (in 15° bins) between −90° and +90° for the orientation errors (see Figs.  2a  and  4a ) and fit Gaussian functions with a constant offset (Eq.  1 ) using non-linear least square regression to quantify these results for each participant (Figs.  2b  and  4b ):     G ( x ) = A exp − ( x − μ ) 2 2 σ 2 + C ,   1     where  A  is the gain, reflecting the proportion of responses around the reported orientation,  μ  is the orientation on which the function is centred (in degrees), σ is the standard deviation (degrees), which provides an index of the precision of participants’ responses, and  C  is a constant used to account for changes in the guessing rate. Using different bin sizes yields the same pattern of results suggesting this procedure did not bias the results (Supplementary Fig.  3 ). We used a Gaussian with a constant offset to characterise behavioural performance, as it captures the distribution of errors well (median  R 2  = 0.76, SE = 0.04 in Experiment 1). This model allows the gain, width, bias and guessing rates to vary independently (Supplementary Fig.  1 ), unlike the function used in a previous study using a continuous report measure for the AB 30 . Most importantly, the function we implemented can also be used to characterise the forward encoding results, thus allowing a direct comparison of the AB based upon behavioural and neural measures.   We used a regression-based approach 63  (see Figs.  2d  and  4c ) to determine how targets and distractors within each RSVP stream influenced behavioural responses. To do this, we aligned the orientations of both distractor and target items from 4 items prior to the appearance of the target through to 9 items after the appearance of the target to construct a regression matrix of the presented orientations. The regression matrix was converted to complex numbers (to account for circularity of orientations) using Eq.  2 :     C 1 = exp ( 1 i C ) ,   2     where C is the regression matrix (in radians) and 1i is an imaginary unit. Standard linear regression was used to determine how the orientations of the items affected the reported orientation using Eq.  3 :     W = C 1 C 1 T − 1 C 1 T R ,   3     where R is the reported orientation (in radians). This was done separately for T1 and T2 reports, with a higher regression weight indicating the item was more influential in determining the reported orientation.   To determine whether the finding that the orientations of T1 and T2 influenced the reported orientation was due to participants integrating the other target or the surrounding distractors (Fig.  3 ), we found the difference in orientation between the target of interest and the other item (either target or distractor) and the orientation error for each trial. This showed an orientation-tuned effect characteristic of integration. To quantitatively determine the magnitude of this effect, we fit first-derivative Gaussian functions (D1; Eq.  4 ) to these responses 36 – 38 :     D 1 ( x ) = A × 1 σ × x − μ × exp − x − μ 2 2 σ 2 ,   4     where  A  is the gain,  μ  is the orientation on which the function is centred (in degrees) and σ is the standard deviation (degrees). Forward encoding modelling   Forward encoding modelling was used to recover orientation-selective responses from the pattern of EEG activity for both target and distractor items in the RSVP stream. This technique has been used previously to reconstruct colour 16 , spatial 15  and orientation 19  selectivity from timeseries data acquired through fMRI. More recently, the same approach has been used to encode orientation 9 , 12 , 13  and spatial 14  information contained within MEG and EEG data, which have better temporal resolution than fMRI.   We used the orientations of the epoched data segments to construct a regression matrix with 9 regression coefficients, one for each of the orientations (Fig.  9a ). This regression matrix was convolved with a tuned set of nine basis functions (half cosine functions raised to the eighth power 9 , 10 , 13 , Eq.  5 ) centred from 0° to 160° in 20° steps.     F x = cos ( x − μ ) 8 ,   5     where  μ  is the orientation on which the channel is centred, and  x  are orientations from 0º to 180º in 1º steps.   Fig. 9. Schematic illustrating the forward encoding procedure used to estimate feature-selectivity for orientation in Experiment 2.     Open in a new tab   a  A basis set of the nine channels used to model feature (orientation) selectivity.  b  The basis set was used to find the expected response (regression coefficients) for each different RSVP item in every trial, for each EEG electrode (three electrodes are shown here for a single example participant). Three trials are shown for the corresponding gratings.  c  Ordinary least squares regression was used to find regression weights for the orientation channels across trials for each EEG electrode (three electrodes are shown here for a single example participant).  d  Shrinkage matrix that the weights were divided by to perform regularisation, to account for correlated activity between electrodes.  e  The regression weights were applied to predict the presented orientation. Neural activity (headmaps) from two trials, with the channel responses for those trials. Dotted lines indicate the presented orientations.  f  Applying this procedure to each time point gives the time course of feature-(orientation) selectivity (for one participant). Trials have been binned in 20º intervals, with the dotted lines representing the presented orientation in those trials. On the  y -axis, 0 ms represents the onset of the item within the RSVP stream. Feature selectivity emerged around 75 ms after stimulus presentation.  g  Modified Gaussian functions (equation) were used to quantify the tuning. The colours of the free parameters in the equation correspond to the relevant components of the tuning curve below. This tuned regression matrix was used to measure orientation information either across trials or in epoched segments. This was done by solving the linear Eq. ( 6 ):     B 1 = W C 1 ,   6     where  B 1  (64 sensors ×  N  training trials) is the electrode data for the training set,  C 1  (9 channels ×  N  training trials) is the tuned channel response across the training trials and W is the weight matrix for the sensors to be estimated (64 sensors × 9 channels). Following methods recently introduced for M/EEG analysis, we separately estimated the weights associated with each channel individually 13 , 64 . W was estimated using least square regression to solve Eq. ( 7 ):     W = C 1 C 1 T − 1 C 1 T B 1 .   7     Following this previous work 11 , 13 , 64 , we removed the correlations between sensors, as these add noise to the linear equation. To do this, we first estimated the noise correlation between electrodes and removed this component through regularisation 65 , 66  by dividing the weights by the shrinkage matrix. The channel response in the test set C 2  (9 channels × N test trials) was estimated using the weights in (7) and applied to activity in B 2  (64 sensors × N test trials), as per Eq.  8 :     C 2 = W W T W T B 2 .   8     To avoid overfitting, we used cross validation (10-fold in the initial whole-trial analysis, and 20-fold when the item presentations were stacked), where X-1 of epochs were used to train the model, and this was then tested on the remaining (X) epoch. This process was repeated until all epochs had served as both test and training trials. We also repeated this procedure for each point in the epoch to determine time-resolved feature-selectivity. To re-align the trials with the exact presented orientation, we reconstructed the item representation 15  by multiplying the channel weights (9 channels × time × trial) against the basis set (180 orientations × 9 channels). This resulted in a 180 (−89° to 90°) Orientations × Trial × Time reconstruction. In order to average across trials, the orientation dimension was shifted so that 0º corresponded to the presented orientation in each trial.   For the initial encoding analysis (Fig.  5 ), to determine whether feature selectivity could be recovered for each RSVP item we used 20 encoding models (one for each item position in the stream) with 600 trials. We trained and tested each model across the entire 2250 ms of the trial to determine when feature selectivity emerged for that RSVP item. This analysis verified that each RSVP item could be encoded independently. We aligned all RSVP items across trials ( N  = 12,000; 600 trials by 20 items) and used a fixed encoding model for training and testing 67 , 68  (Figs.  6 – 8 ). This meant we trained and tested all encoding models across all items (both targets and distractors) regardless of trial type 12 , 13 .   Aligned item reconstructions were then averaged over the relevant condition (Lag, Accuracy or item position) and smoothed using a Gaussian with a temporal kernel of 6 ms 10 , 13  to quantify feature selectivity. The Gaussian functions were fit, using least square regression, to quantify different parameters of feature selectivity across timepoints, as per Eq.  1 , where  A  is the gain representing the amount of feature selective activity,  μ  is the orientation on which the function is centred (in degrees), σ is the width (degrees) and  C  is a constant used to account for non-feature selective baseline shifts. Univariate orientation selectivity analysis   We used a univariate selectivity analysis 10  to determine the topography associated with orientation-selective activity for targets and distractors (Fig.  8b ). Data were epoched in the same manner as in the forward encoding model where EEG activity was aligned with each stream item. We separated these epochs into target and distractor presentations to determine whether these two types of stimulus were processed differently. All target presentations were used in training (1200 in total; 600 trials with two targets in each), together with a pseudo-random selection of the same number of distractor items. To determine the topography, we used a general linear model to estimate orientation selectivity for each sensor from the sine and cosine of the presentation orientation, and a constant regressor in each presentation. From the weights of the two orientation coefficients we calculated selectivity using Eq.  9 :     A = B 1 cos 2 + B 2 sin 2 ,   9     A  was derived through permutation testing in which the design matrix was shuffled ( N  = 1000) and weights calculated. The non-permuted weights were ranked and compared with the permutation distribution, thus enabling calculation of the z-scored difference. To calculate group-level effects, cluster-based sign-flipping permutation testing ( N  = 1500) across electrodes and time was implemented in Fieldtrip 69  to determine whether the topographies differed between conditions. Statistics   All statistical tests were two-sided, and Bonferroni adjustments were used to correct for multiple comparisons where noted. Non-parametric sign permutation tests 69 , 70  were used to determine differences in the time courses of feature selectivity (Figs.  5  and  6 ) between conditions. The sign of the data was randomly flipped ( N  = 20,000), with equal probability, to create a null distribution. Cluster-based permutation testing was used to correct for multiple comparisons over the timeseries, with a cluster-form threshold of  p  < 0.05 and significance threshold of  p  < 0.05. Reporting summary   Further information on research design is available in the  Nature Research Reporting Summary  linked to this article. Supplementary information     Supplementary Information  (1.6MB, pdf)      Peer Review File  (2.8MB, pdf)