>Materials and Methods   Subjects   We used 14 wild-type C57Bl/6 mice, seven of which were male and seven were female. Mice were between 11 and 16 weeks old at the start of the experiment. All mice were housed individually during the experiment with food and water  ad libitum  in a 12/12 h light/dark cycle. Experiments were performed during the light phase. All experiments were performed in accordance with the European Communities Council Directive. Protocols were reviewed and approved by the Erasmus Laboratory Animal Science Center (work protocol no. 15-273-138; project license no. AVD101002015273) Auditory brainstem responses (ABRs)   Since C57Bl/6 mice are prone for developing hearing problems, we recorded the ABRs before the start of eyeblink conditioning training to obtain hearing level thresholds. Mice were anesthetized with a ketamine/xylazine mixture at a dose of 100/10 mg/kg body weight, administered intraperitoneally (ketamine: Alfasan; xylazine: Sedazine, AST Farma). After this, they were placed in a sound-attenuated and light-attenuated box with the ears at a distance of 4 cm from a frontally placed loudspeaker. Needle electrodes were positioned subdermal at the base of both pinnae, the external part of the ear. The reference electrode was placed at the vertex, the upper surface of the head, and a ground electrode on the lower back. Stimuli were generated and presented by a RZb Multi I/O Processor (TuckerDavis Technologies) and BioSigRZ software. Responses were recorded using Medusa DA4PA, 4-dh Preamp device. Responses with amplitudes larger than 30 μV were considered as artefacts and therefore excluded from further analysis. Hearing level thresholds were measured at 4, 8, 16, and 32 kHz ( Willott, 2006 ). Thresholds were defined as the lowest sound pressure level (SPL) at which a reproducible response (i.e., peak in the ABR trace) was still detectable. Since our main aim was to establish that mice could detect the tones used in our behavioral training paradigm and not to establish definite age and mouse species dependent absolute hearing thresholds, we performed our ABR recordings under anesthesia since it is technically less complicated. One should keep in mind, however, that ABR responses under ketamine/xylazine anesthesia, although it is a standard procedure in mice ( Huang et al., 1995 ;  Willott, 2006 ;  Ingham et al., 2011 ), are generally weaker compared with those recorded in awake animals ( van Looij et al., 2004 ). After the ABR recordings, which took ∼20–30 min per animal, mice were injected with atipamezole (Antisedan, Orion Pharam; 10 mg/kg body weight, i.p.) for the reversal of xylazine. Surgery   After ABR recordings, mice had 2 d of recovery before they underwent surgery. Mice were anesthetized with 2% isoflurane (vaporizer for Isoflurane Anesthetic Model100 Vaporizer, Forane, Surgivet) and body temperature was kept constant at ∼37°C (DC Temperature controller, FHC). After fixation in a standard mouse stereotaxic alignment system (Stoelting) and under sterile conditions, the scalp was incised (∼10 mm) to expose the skull. Membranous tissue was cleared and the bone was prepared with Optibond FL (All-in-one bonding agent Kerr). A small brass pedestal with a square magnet on top was attached to the skull with a dental composite (Charisma, Mitsui Chemical Group), using an xyz manipulator, allowing for fixation to a head bar at right angles during experiments. After surgery mice recovered under a heating lamp for at least 20 min, until they were fully awake. They were given postoperative analgesic (Rimadyl Cattle, Cappelle a/d.) on the following day. Mice had 3 d to fully recover, before eyeblink conditioning habituation training started. Eyeblink conditioning, apparatus   All behavioral experiments were conducted in custom built sound-attenuating and light-attenuating boxes. Mice were placed head-fixed on top of a cylindrical treadmill on which they were allowed to walk freely ( Fig. 1 A ;  Heiney et al., 2014 ;  Boele et al., 2018 ). The treadmill consisted of a foam roller (diameter, ±15 cm; width, ±12 cm; Exervo, TeraNova EVA) with a horizontal metal rod through the axis that was connected with a ball bearing construction to two solid vertical metal poles. A horizontal messing bar was fixated to the same vertical poles at 3–5 cm above the treadmill. Mice were head-fixed to the bar with the use of a screw, allowing the magnet on top of the pedestal to perfectly dovetail another magnet with opposite polarity in the middle of the horizontal messing bar in the exact point of fixation, thereby ensuring easy fixation and perfect head stability ( Fig. 1 A ;  Chettih et al., 2011 ;  Heiney et al., 2014 ;  Boele et al., 2018 ). The CS was a 280-ms tone with a frequency of 10 kHz with a 25-ms ramp/decay time. The US consisted of a 30-ms duration mild corneal air puff, which was controlled by a VHS P/P solenoid valve (Lohm rate, 4750 Lohms; Internal volume, 30 μl, The Lee Company) and delivered via a 27.5-mm gauge needle that was perpendicularly positioned at ∼5 mm from the center of the left cornea. The back pressure on the solenoid valve was set at 30 psi. We used an interstimulus interval of 250 ms and an intertrial interval of 8–12 s. Eyelid movements were recorded using a high-speed video camera (333 fps, Basler a cA640-750u m ID: 106748-15). Stimulus control and data acquisition were done with National Instruments hardware. All experiments were performed at approximately the same time of the day by the same experimenter.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Eyeblink conditioning setup and experimental design.  A , Mice were placed in a light-isolating and sound-isolating chamber on a foam cylindrical treadmill that allowed them to walk freely with their heads fixed at a horizontal bar. The unconditioned stimulus, US (in red) consisted of a weak air puff to the left eye and the conditioned stimulus, CS (in green) consisted of a 10-kHz tone. Speakers were placed on both upper front corners of the chamber. Eyelid movements were recorded using a high-speed video camera system (300 fps).  B , Schematics of eyelid conditioning acquisition training and generalization test protocols. For each protocol the duration and the ratio of different trial types is presented at the top of the corresponding illustration.  C , Example eyeblink traces before, during, and after eyeblink conditioning. The CS (green) and US (red) onset and duration are shown at the top of each panel. Over the course of acquisition training, mice learn to close their eyes in response to the CS, which are called conditioned responses (CRs). Eyeblink conditioning, habituation to eyeblink conditioning apparatus   Mice were head-fixed on the head bar and allowed to walk on the treadmill for 20–30 min/d for 2 d without any stimuli to get them acquainted with the eyeblink set-up. Eyeblink conditioning, baseline measurements to find the proper tone threshold for each animal   After the 2 d of habituation, we measured the sensitivity of each mouse for the tone CS (10 kHz) and tone GSs (ranging from 2 to 8 and 12 to 20 kHz in steps of 2 kHz). Since the responsiveness of an individual mouse to auditory stimuli can slightly vary from day to day, and since we were testing 10 different tone frequencies and did not want to present too many trials during a baseline session, we repeated this measurement for 10 consecutive days for each animal (30 min each day), until we found for each animal the proper SPLs (SPL in dB) for each tone frequency ( Figs. 2 B ,  3 A ). Each baseline session consisted of two blocks of 10 tone-only trials and 1 US-only trial each, and thus had two tone-only trials of each tone frequency for each session.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Mouse ABRs and auditory eyelid startle responses to a range of sound frequencies and intensities.  A , ABRs were measured at 4, 8, 16, and 32 kHz. Mice were most sensitive to sounds in the range of 8 and 16 kHz showing normal auditory thresholds. Each symbol represents one mouse. For the boxplot, the thick horizontal line is showing the median, the top edge of each box indicates the 25th percentile, bottom edge the 75th percentile, whisker lines extending above and below each box indicate the range of observations.  B , The SPLs that elicits minimal auditory eyelid startle response for different sound frequencies. This value was determined for each mouse carefully during 10 baseline sessions and used as CS or GS. Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Mouse eyelid startle responses obscure CR onset.  A , Example eyelid responses to a 10-kHz tone in a naive unconditioned mouse presented at three different sound intensities: 60, 70, and 80 decibels (dB). In this example the 60-dB tone elicits just an α startle response, the 70-dB tone an α and β startle response, and the 80 an α and β startle and even a response that resembles a CR. For this mouse, a tone with a SPL of 60 dB would be a proper CS for training.  B , Example eyelid responses after training taken from the same animal. In the left panel, the α startle response obscures the CR onset. In the right panel, there is no startle response and consequently the latency to CR onset can be detected reliably.  C , Separation of startle and nonstartle trials was achieved by taking the first derivative of the eyelid position signal. In this velocity signal, the presence of a peak immediately after CS onset was the discriminator between startle (top panels) and nonstartle trials (bottom panels). Latency to CR onset was determined in nonstartle trials. For all other outcome measures, startle and nonstartle trials were combined. Similar to  Figure 2 , the blue gradient indicates GSs with frequencies higher than the 10-kHz CS and red gradient indicates GSs with frequencies lower than the 10-kHz CS. Each line is the averaged velocity signal of the eyeblink trace for one GS or CS frequency. For all panels, the green dashed line indicates CS onset, the red dashed line indicates expected US onset. The light green and red shadings indicate CS and US duration, respectively. Eyelid is fully open at 0 and fully closed at 1. The US is omitted in the CS-only trials. CS (tone), US (eye puff).  D , Eyelid responses separated by the presence of an α startle response. Left panel shows eyelid traces with a startle response, right panel shows traces without a startle response. As a behavioral readout for the tone sensitivity, we used the eyelid component of the auditory startle reflex ( Boele et al., 2010 ). This startle response, sometimes referred to as α response, was quantified using the velocity signals (first derivative of position signal;  Fig. 3 C ). An eyelid response was considered as a startle response if there was a peak in the velocity signal between 30 and 80 ms after CS onset that was larger than 3 SDs of the 500-ms baseline period and larger than an arbitrary threshold set at 0.00025 ( Fig. 3 B , D ). We considered the potential effect of “latent inhibition,” which is the phenomenon whereby it takes longer to get conditioned to a familiar stimulus (i.e., a tone that one has heard many times) than to novel stimulus (i.e., a new tone). Therefore, all animals received the exact same number of CS-only trials during baseline, so that the novelty level of the tone was equal for all animals. Eyeblink conditioning, acquisition training sessions   Mice were trained for 10 consecutive days (40 min/d). Each daily session was composed of 20 blocks of 12 trials each. Each block consisted of 1 US-only trial, 10 paired (CS-US with an interstimulus interval, ISI of 250 ms) trials, and one CS-only trial ( Fig. 1 B , C ). Trials were semi-randomly distributed, whereby a CS-only trial was always immediately preceded by at least two paired CS-US trials. Eyeblink conditioning, generalization test sessions   The 10 d of acquisition training were followed by seven generalization test sessions, during which the GSs were presented in addition to the CS. Each daily generalization test session was composed of eight blocks of 31 trials each, including 20 paired CS-US trials, one US-only, and 10 tone (CS or GS) only trials ( Fig. 1 B ). Since the ratio of paired CS-US to CS/GS only trial changed significantly, we carefully checked day-by-day whether there was any extinction of eyeblink CRs. Since it is known that the probability of a CR is lower in a trial that is preceded by a trial wherein the tone was not reinforced ( Najafi and Medina, 2020 ), in our experimental design a tone only trial (CS only or GS only) was always immediately preceded by two paired CS-US trials. Eyeblink conditioning, data analysis   Individual eyeblink traces were analyzed with a custom-written MATLAB script (R2018a, MathWorks). First, the 2000-ms eyeblink traces were imported from the MySQL database into MATLAB. The trials were aligned at zero for the 500-ms pre-CS baselines. Trials with significant activity in the 500-ms pre-CS period (more than seven times the interquartile range) were regarded as invalid and disregarded for further analysis. The eyelid signal was min-max normalized so that a fully open eye corresponded with a value of 0 and a fully closed eye with a value of 1. This normalization was achieved by aligning the 500-ms pre-CS baselines of all traces and dividing each trace by the averaged UR value that was calculated over all eyelid traces in US only trials for one session. The normalized eyelid closure amplitude was expressed as fraction eyelid closure (FEC).   In our analysis we only included CS-only trials, since these trials show the full kinetic profile of the eyelid response. In valid normalized CS-only trials, eyelid responses were considered as a CR if the maximum amplitude was larger than 0.05 in the interval between 100–500 ms after CS onset and the presence of a positive slope in the 150-ms before the time point where the US would have been delivered (US is omitted in CS-only trials). For each session for each mouse, we calculated the percentage of trials in which a CR was present, which we will refer to as “CR percentage.” In addition, we determined for each trial the maximum eyelid closure between 100 and 500 ms after CS onset, which we will refer to as “Eye closure – all trials.” Similarly, we calculated the maximum eyelid closure between 100 and 500 ms after CS onset in trials wherein a CR was present based on the criteria described above, which we will refer to as “Eye closure – CR trials.” CR adaptive timing was investigated by calculating the latency to the onset of the CR relative to CS onset, referred to as “Latency to CR onset,” and the latency to maximum eye closure relative to CS onset, referred to as “Latency to CR peak.” Latency to CR onset and latency to CR peak were only calculated in trials wherein a CR was present. Latency to CR onset was only calculated for trials wherein no α startle response was present.   Statistical analysis was done using multilevel linear mixed-effect (LME) models in R Studio (code available on request). LMEs have several major advantages over standard parametric and nonparametric tests ( Aarts et al., 2014 ;  Schielzeth et al., 2020 ), as they are more robust to violations of normality assumptions, which is often the case in biological data samples. Moreover, use of LME models is able to accommodate the nested structure of our data (i.e., trial nested within session, session nested within animal, animal nested within group). Finally, LME models are objectively better at handling missing data points than repeated measures ANOVA models and do not require homoscedasticity as an inherent assumption. In our LME, we used session and tone frequency as fixed effects, and mouse as a random effect. Goodness of fit model comparison was determined by evaluating log likelihood ratio, BIC, and AIC values. The distribution of residuals was inspected visually by plotting the quantiles of standard normal versus standardized residuals (i.e., Q-Q plots). Correction for multiple comparisons was achieved, using false-discovery rate (FDR). Data were considered as statistically significant if the corrected  p -value was <0.05. Results   We used eyeblink conditioning to test stimulus generalization in mice that were conditioned using a 10-kHz tone. Before we started the eyeblink conditioning acquisition training, we carefully measured the sensitivity of each mouse to the specific tones used during the experiment.   Auditory brainstem and auditory startle responses   Some mouse strains, including the popular C57Bl/6 mouse strain, are susceptible to age-related hearing loss. On the other end, mice in general are anxious prey animals that are very sensitive to sounds and easily startle ( Turner et al., 2005 ;  King et al., 2015 ;  Dent et al., 2018 ). To this end, we tested both ABRs and auditory startle responses in the mice before the start of the training. ABRs were measured in mice at the age of nine weeks after birth. We followed the standardized protocol during which clicks were presented at 4, 8, 16, and 32 kHz ( Willott, 2006 ;  Akil et al., 2016 ). At the lowest frequency of 4 kHz, a SPL of 53 dB was needed to elicit a reliable ABR peak ( Fig. 2 A ). ABR peaks were elicited with the lowest SPL of 23 dB at a frequency of 16 kHz. Our results are in line with previous work testing ABRs in various mouse strains, including C57Bl/6J, at roughly the same age range ( Zheng et al., 1999 ;  Ison et al., 2007 ). Since we found recognizable ABR peaks in the entire range of 4–32 kHz, and since our findings are in line with these previous reports in mice ( Heffner and Heffner, 2007 ;  Reynolds et al., 2010 ), we conclude that hearing was intact in our animals.   Next, we established for each mouse the auditory startle response threshold. One component of the auditory startle response is a quick, partial, eyelid closure with a latency to peak of ∼50 ms. Sometimes this α startle is followed by a β startle, or short-latency response (SLR), which has a latency to peak of ∼100 ms, and these β startles can easily mask and sometimes even mimic cerebellar CRs. For this reason, we carefully determined at each tone (CS and GS) frequency for each mouse the SPL that was just sufficient to elicit a very small α startle response, but absolutely no β startle ( Boele et al., 2010 ). The sound frequencies used ranged from 2 to 20 kHz in steps of 2 kHz; all stimuli had the same duration and ramp/decay pattern as those of the CS and GSs. Importantly, during the baseline measurement, these tones were never reinforced with an eye puff US. The baseline sessions were repeated for 10 d, each day consisting of 20 trials, which was necessary to find a proper SPL for each frequency and for each animal. To avoid the potentially differentiating effect of latent inhibition ( Lubow and Moore, 1959 ;  Lubow, 1973 ) between animals, all mice received the exact same amount of tone-only trials during the baseline session.   Responses to tone-only trials at different tone frequencies for the last baseline session revealed that there was considerable variation in sound sensitivity between mice ( Fig. 2 B ). However, response thresholds for different frequencies within each mouse looked quite uniform ( Fig. 2 B ). In line with the ABR measurements, and in agreement with previous work ( Heffner and Heffner, 2007 ;  Reynolds et al., 2010 ), we found that mice tended to be more sensitive, i.e., startled more easily at higher tone frequencies (16–20 kHz) than at lower frequencies (2–6 kHz). For this reason, the GS at the higher frequencies were delivered at slightly lower SPLs than those at the lower frequencies ( Fig. 2 B ). Once the proper SPLs were established for each mouse for all tone frequencies, including the 10-kHz CS, these values were not changed anymore during the subsequent acquisition training sessions (days 1–10) and generalization test sessions (days 11–17). Eyeblink conditioning, acquisition sessions (days 1–10)   Eyeblink acquisition training started the day after the last baseline session. Mice were trained for 10 consecutive days. Inspection of averaged traces showed that the size of eyelid responses to the CS gradually increased over the course of 10-d acquisition training ( Fig. 4 A ). We quantified the CR percentage and found that three mice did not show a significant increase ( Fig. 4 B , gray dashed lines). These three mice were therefore disregarded in any further analysis, since our main question focuses on stimulus generalization in animals that had learned the task properly. In the remaining 11 animals, we found a statistically significant main effect of session for the average CR percentage ( Fig. 4 B ;  Table 1 ;  F (9,90)  = 10.85,  p  < 0.0001, ANOVA on LME). Mice reached a stable CR percentage of ∼65–70 around day 8 that did not further increase. We did not find an effect of sex on CR probability, male and female mice showed identical learning curves ( Fig. 9 A ;  F (9,1)  = 0.07,  p  = 0.79, ANOVA on LME). Further quantification of the eyelid response amplitudes, revealed that there was a statistically significant main effect of session for CR amplitude calculated over all trials ( Fig. 4 C ;  Table 1 ;  F (9,2000)  = 16.56,  p  < 0.0001, ANOVA on LME). Similar to CR percentage, there was no further increase after day 8. Based on the distribution of all eyelid responses (in  Fig. 4 D , sessions 8–10 pooled), we set an arbitrary cutoff at a FEC of 0.05 to distinguish between CRs (≥0.05) and non-CRs (<0.05). We calculated the CR amplitude over the CR only trials and found a similar main effect of session ( Fig. 4 E ;  Table 1 ;  F (9,931)  = 8.14,  p  < 0.0001, ANOVA on LME). (Also, see the distribution of FEC calculated over CR only trials from sessions 8–10 pooled in  Fig. 4 F .)   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Mice acquire conditioned eyelid responses over the course of 10 consecutive training sessions.  A , Averaged eyeblink traces in CS-only trials during acquisition sessions 1, 4, 7, and 10 for the 11 mice that learned the task. The green dashed line indicates CS onset, the red dashed line indicates expected US onset. The light green and red shadings indicate CS and US duration, respectively. Eyelid is fully open at 0 and fully closed at 1. The US is omitted in the CS-only trials.  B , CR percentage as a function of acquisition training session. Each solid gray line represents a mouse that did learn the task ( n  =11), each dotted gray line represents an animal that did not learn the task, i.e., did not reach a CR percentage of >20 after 10 training days ( n  = 3). Black line with black filled dots indicates the mean of each session for the 11 animals that learn the task.  C , Eyelid closure amplitude over all trials plotted as a function of acquisition training session. The effect of session is statistically significant. For the boxplot, the thick horizontal line is showing the median, the top edge of each box indicates the 25th percentile, bottom edge the 75th percentile, whisker lines extending above and below each box indicate the range of observations, the plus symbols indicate outliers. The black line plot with filled black dots indicates the mean for each acquisition session.  D , Distribution of eyelid closure amplitude calculated