>Methods   Participants   Thirty-three participants took part in the first two sessions (independent EEG training set and practice). Three of them met the practice session’s pre-established criteria for exclusion (see ‘Procedure’). The remaining 30 participants (22±3-y-old, 10 men, two left-handed) took part in the final (main experimental) session. They all had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The study was approved by the local ethics committee. Participants gave informed consent and received research credits or 15 euros per hour. Stimuli   The target stimulus set had a 2 (illusory Kanizsa triangle: present/absent)×2 (non-illusory triangle: present/absent)×2 (rotation: present/absent) design, resulting in eight stimuli ( Figure 1B ). Three aligned Pac-Man elements induced the Kanizsa illusion. The non-illusory triangle was present when the stimuli’s three other elements (the ‘two-legged white circles’) were aligned. The controls for both the illusory and non-illusory triangles were created by rotating their elements by 90 degrees. Differences in local contrast were created by rotating the entire stimulus by 180 degrees. The targets spanned 7.5 degrees by 8.3 degrees of visual angle. The shortest distance between the edges of the three Pac-Man stimuli as well as between the edges of the three aligned two-legged white circles was 2.8 degrees of visual angle. Although neuronal responses to collinearity in primary visual cortex are most robust when this distance is smaller ( Kapadia et al., 1995 ;  Kapadia et al., 2000 ), longer-range lateral connections between neurons with similar orientation selectivity can span distances corresponding to visual angles considerably greater than 2.8 degrees ( Bosking et al., 1997 ;  Stettler et al., 2002 ).   The distractor stimulus set was the same as the target stimulus set, with two exceptions. First, the distractors were red instead of black. Second, the distractors’ six elements were rotated by 180 degrees relative to the targets’, so neither the illusory nor non-illusory triangle was ever present in the distractors. Masks consisted of six differently shaped elements, all capable of covering the targets’ elements. Six masks were created by rotating the original mask five times by 60 degrees. They spanned 8.5 degrees by 9.1 degrees of visual angle. The fixation cross, which was always present, was adapted from  Thaler et al., 2013 . Procedure   The experiment consisted of three separate sessions conducted on different days: a 3 hr session to collect EEG data for the independent training set, a 1.5 hr practice session, and a 3 hr experimental session. Tasks were programmed in Presentation software (Neurobehavioral Systems) and displayed on a 23-inch, 60 Hz, 1920×1080 pixels monitor. On each trial of the experimental session, participants were shown two targets (T1 and T2) within a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) of distractors ( Figure 1C ). The targets and distractors had a stimulus onset asynchrony of 100 ms. T2 and distractors were presented for 17ms each. To improve the decoding analyses’ training dataset, T1 was presented for 67 ms. The longer presentation duration facilitated attending to T1, which should result in greater deployment of attentional resources and thereby increase the size of the AB. T1 was preceded by five distractors, and T2 was followed by six distractors.   T2 visibility was manipulated in two ways, using a perceptual and an attentional manipulation ( Figure 1A ). The perceptual manipulation consisted of masking T2 with three masks, each presented for 17 ms with an interstimulus interval of 0 ms. The three masks were selected randomly, but all differed from each other. Half of the T2s were masked; for the other half, no masks were presented (unmasked condition). The attentional manipulation consisted of shortening the T1–T2 lag from a long interval of eight distractors (900 ms) to a short interval of one or two distractors (200 or 300 ms). Half the trials had a long lag, and the other half had a short lag. The short lag duration was determined for each participant individually during the training session. Short lags were expected to result in an AB. Participants were instructed to fixate on the fixation cross. After the RSVP, they indicated for each target whether it contained the Kanizsa illusion or not. For T2, participants simultaneously reported their confidence in their response: low, medium, or high, resulting in six response options. To get accurate ratings, participants first responded to T2 and then to T1. Response screens lasted until the response. In short, the experimental session had an 8 (T1 stimulus conditions)×8 (T2 stimulus conditions)×2 (masked/unmasked)×2 (short/long T1–T2 lag) task design, resulting in 256 conditions. Each condition was presented four times, totaling 1024 trials.   The experimental session was preceded by the practice session, in which participants were familiarized with the task. To proceed to the experimental session, participants had to score above 80% correct for both T1 and unmasked, long lag T2. One participant was excluded for failing to achieve this. The training session was also used to determine for each participant the duration of the short lag (200 or 300 ms T1–T2 interval) that induced the largest AB (lowest T2 accuracy) and that was used in the subsequent experimental session. Two participants were excluded due to their AB size falling below the predetermined criterion. Specifically, their T2 accuracy at both short lags did not exhibit a decrease of more than 5% compared to long lags.   One of the main goals of this study was to match perceptual performance between the perceptual and the attentional manipulation. We did this in two ways. First, during the training session, the matching was done by staircasing mask contrast using the weighted up-down method ( Kaernbach, 1991 ). Contrast levels ranged from 0 (black) to 255 (white). Mask contrast started at level 220. Each correct response made the task more difficult: masks got darker by downward step size  S down . Each incorrect response made the task easier: masks got lighter by upward step size  S up . Step sizes were determined by  S up  × p  =  S down  × (1 –  p ), where  p  is the accuracy at short lags. The smallest step size was always nine contrast levels. A reversal is making a mistake after a correct response, or vice versa. The staircase ended after 25 reversals. The mask contrast with which the experimental session started was the average contrast level of the last 20 reversals. Second, during the experimental session, after every 32 masked trials, mask contrast could be updated in accordance with our goal to match accuracy over participants, while also matching accuracy within participants as well as possible.   To ensure that confidence ratings for these matched conditions (masked, long lag and unmasked, short lag) were not influenced by participants anchoring their confidence ratings to the very easy and very difficult unmatched conditions (no and both manipulations, respectively), one type of block only contained the matched conditions, while the other block type contained the two remaining, unmatched conditions (masked, short lag and unmasked, long lag). To ensure every confidence rating would have enough trials for creating receiver operating characteristic curves, participants were instructed to distribute their responses evenly over all ratings within a block. Participants received feedback about the distribution of their responses. The mask contrasts from a performance matched block were used in the subsequent non-performance matched block to ensure that masking remained orthogonal to the AB manipulation. The experimental session, therefore, always started with a performance matched block.   We wanted to compare illusory triangle decoding to non-illusory triangle decoding. However, during the experimental session, the non-illusory triangle was never task-relevant, only the illusory one was. During the independent EEG classification training session, we, therefore, made each visual feature, one after the other, task-relevant. A target was presented for 33 ms every 900–1100 ms ( Figure 3A ). Participants had to fixate on the fixation cross and indicate whether the current task-relevant feature was absent or present. For each feature, each target was presented 64 times, totaling 512 trials. The order of the task-relevant features was counterbalanced over participants. For all sessions, response button mapping was counterbalanced within tasks. Behavioral analysis   To quantify perceptual performance, we constructed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves by plotting objective hit rates against objective false alarm rates. We used the six response options to get five inflection points ( Green and Swets, 1966 ). We also quantified metacognitive sensitivity: the ability to know whether you were right or wrong. Performance is high when you are confident in objectively correct responses and not confident in objectively incorrect responses. We again constructed ROC curves, now by plotting the rate of high-confidence correct responses (subjective hit rates) against the rate of high-confidence incorrect responses (subjective false alarm rates). We used the three confidence ratings to get two inflection points. To ensure that T1 was attended, trials with incorrect T1 responses were excluded. Frequentist and Bayesian repeated measures ANOVAs and t-tests were used to test the differences between experimental conditions. Bayesian statistics were calculated in JASP ( JASP Team, 2024 ) with default prior scales (Cauchy distribution, scale 0.707). EEG recording and preprocessing   EEG was recorded at 1024 Hz using a 64-channel ActiveTwo system (BioSemi). Four electrooculographic (EOG) electrodes measured horizontal and vertical eye movements. The data were analyzed with MATLAB (MathWorks). For most of the preprocessing steps, EEGLAB was used ( Delorme and Makeig, 2004 ). The data were re-referenced to the earlobes. Poor channels were interpolated. High-pass filtering can cause artifacts in decoding analyses; we, therefore, removed slow drifts using trial-masked robust detrending ( van Driel et al., 2021 ). Each target was epoched from –250–1000 ms relative to target onset. To improve the results from the independent component analysis (ICA), baseline correction was applied using the whole epoch as baseline ( Groppe et al., 2009 ). ICA was used to remove blinks. Blink components were removed manually. Baseline correction was applied, now using a –250–0 ms window relative to target onset. Trials with values outside a –300–300 microvolts range were removed. We used an adapted version of FieldTrip’s ft_artifact_zvalue function to detect and remove trials with muscle artifacts ( Oostenveld et al., 2011 ). As in the behavioral analyses, trials with incorrect T1 responses were excluded. Finally, the data were downsampled to 128 Hz. Multivariate pattern analyses   We decoded the different visual features (local contrast, non-illusory triangle, and illusory Kanizsa triangle, respectively;  Figure 1B ) using the Amsterdam Decoding and Modeling (ADAM) toolbox ( Fahrenfort et al., 2018 ). For each participant and each visual feature, a linear discriminant classifier was trained on the T1 data and tested on each condition of the T2 data. The classifier was trained to discriminate between the feature’s (e.g. the illusory triangle’s) absence and presence based on the preprocessed EEG activity across all electrodes. AUC was again used as the performance measure. This procedure was executed for every time sample in a trial, yielding classification performance over time. For the time samples from –100–700 ms relative to target onset, we used a two-sided t-test to evaluate whether classifier performance differed from chance. We used cluster-based permutation testing (1000 iterations at a threshold of 0.05) to correct for multiple comparisons ( Maris and Oostenveld, 2007 ). To obtain topographic maps showing the neural sources of the classifier performance, we multiplied the classifier weights with the data covariance matrix, yielding covariance/class separability maps ( Haufe et al., 2014 ).   In the decoding analyses described in the results, we applied ‘diagonal decoding:’ classifiers were tested on the same time sample they were trained on. We did the same analyses again, now by applying ‘off-diagonal decoding:’ classifiers trained on a particular time point are tested on all time points ( King and Dehaene, 2014 ). Off-diagonal decoding allowed us to explore whether patterns of activity during the time windows of interest were stable over time ( Figure 2—figure supplement 2 ), which is especially interesting for illusion decoding. For the illusory triangle, classifiers were trained on the 200–250 ms window and then averaged, and then decoding AUC was plotted from –100–700 ms off-diagonally. Note that for this analysis, late off-diagonal decoding (e.g. in the 375–475 ms time-window shown in panel C) is thought to reflect (longer-lasting) local recurrent interactions as well ( Alilović et al., 2023 ). A similar off-diagonal analysis was done for the local contrast trained on the 75–95 ms time-window.   To distinguish between collinearity-only and illusion-specific processing, we trained classifiers on independent data based on collinearity-only (the non-illusory triangle was task-relevant) or collinearity-plus-illusion (the illusory triangle was task-relevant) and then decoded the Kanizsa illusion in T2s of the main RSVP task. The rationale for this analysis is that collinearity is present both when the Pac-Man stimuli align to form the illusory Kanizsa triangle and when the two-legged white circles align to form a non-illusory triangle, but only in the case of the Kanizsa triangle do participants experience an illusion. The comparison of T2 illusion decoding between the classifiers trained on the illusion and on collinearity-only in the training set may, therefore, isolate illusion-specific (likely involving feedback processing) from basic collinearity processing (likely involving lateral connections;  Figure 3 ). In  Appendix 1  and  Figure 3—figure supplement 2 , we compare the independent training set to the training set used for the main analyses, the T1 data from the RSVP task.   As described in  Appendix 1  as well, a 10-fold cross-validation scheme was applied to the data from the independent training set to decode local contrast. Individual participants’ data were split into ten equal-sized folds after randomizing the task’s trial order. A classifier was then trained on ninefolds and tested on the tenth one, ensuring independence of the training and testing sets. This procedure was repeated until each fold served as the test set once. Classifier performance, AUC, was averaged across all ten iterations ( Figure 3—figure supplement 1 ).   As in the behavioral analyses, frequentist and Bayesian repeated measures ANOVAs and t-tests were used to test the differences between experimental conditions. Appendix 1   The experimental blocks of the independent training set differed from the main rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) task in task context, trial design, and stimulus timing (stimuli were presented briefly and in isolation) ( Figure 1C  vs.  Figure 3A ) and were collected on a different day, with fewer trials. This led to overall slightly lower decoding performance compared to the main analyses based on training classifiers on the T1 data ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1 , top vs. bottom panels), likely reflecting these design differences and greater differences between training and test data with regard to conscious access and working memory demands. Despite these differences, we successfully used these independent classifiers to replicate ( Figure 3—figure supplement 2 ) and expand upon ( Figure 3 ) the results from our main analyses.   Figure 3  shows the comparison of T2 illusory triangle decoding between the classifiers trained on the illusory (green lines) and non-illusory triangle in the independent training set (purple lines), because this comparison may isolate illusion-specific processing from basic collinearity-only processing. For this analysis approach to be valid, collinearity-only processing should be similar for the illusory and the non-illusory triangle. To demonstrate that this was indeed the case, we reversed the original cross-feature-decoding scheme: Instead of testing on the illusory triangle, we tested on the non-illusory triangle in T2s, while using the same classifiers that had been trained on either the non-illusory or illusory triangle using the independent training data ( Figure 3—figure supplement 3A , green and purple lines). If collinearity-only processing did not differ between the two types of triangles, there should now be no difference in decoding performance between the classifiers, which is what we found for both the 140–190 ( t 29 =−0.90, p=0.378, BF 01 =3.56) and the 200–250ms window ( t 29 =0.69, p=0.493, BF 01 =4.12;  Figure 3—figure supplement 3B ).   We also sought to demonstrate that training on the non-illusory triangle and testing on the illusory triangle in T2s, as reported in the main manuscript, indeed reflected collinearity processing (i.e. the visual properties shared by the two types of triangles, their shape), and no other irrelevant, e.g., task- or attention-related processes. For this purpose, we also trained a classifier on local contrast using the independent training data and tested on the illusory triangle. Local contrast is fully orthogonal to the illusion and has nothing (visual) in common with the illusion, so that any successful decoding would have to reflect non-visual, irrelevant processes. However, we found that this decoding scheme’s classifier performance never reached significance (p>0.05).   Finally, for local contrast decoding, we examined whether the fact that local contrast was not task-relevant or explicitly attended during the main RSVP task could have influenced our findings. We addressed this question by leveraging the manipulation of task-relevance in the independent training set, where either local contrast (‘Was the target rotated 180 degrees?’), the non-illusory triangle (‘Did the target contain a non-illusory triangle?’), or the illusory triangle (‘Did the target contain an illusory triangle?’) was task-relevant. For each task-relevance condition, local contrast was decoded using a tenfold cross-validation scheme, and the resulting 75–95 ms time window was again averaged ( Figure 3—figure supplement 1A ). Surprisingly, we found that classifier performance was somewhat better when local contrast was task-irrelevant ( F 1,29 =5.30, p=0.008, BF 10 =5.39). However, when we repeated this analysis using data from an independent study with virtually the same task design, we found that task-relevance had no significant effect on local contrast decoding ( F 1,29 =1.42, p=0.251, BF 01 =3.17;  Figure 3—figure supplement 1B ). Local contrast decoding thus appeared largely unaffected by task-relevance.   Using the independent training set, we also replicated the observation that the two consciousness manipulations left local contrast decoding largely intact. For this control analysis, we trained the classifier on the independent training set in which local contrast was task-relevant ( Figure 3B , light blue lines). As for our previous main analyses, we averaged the 75–95 ms time window, as this window again contained the decoding peak with occipital topography ( Figure 2—figure supplement 1A , bottom). Similar to our main analyses, another rm ANOVA with the factors masking (present/absent) and T1-T2 lag (short/long) showed that neither masking ( F 1,29 =0.97, p=0.334, BF 01 =2.90) nor the T1-T2 lag ( F 1,29 =0.72, p=0.403, BF 01 =3.54) had a significant effect on local contrast decoding, and a paired t-test revealed no evidence of a significant difference between the two performance matched conditions (masked vs. AB condition , t 29 =1.20, p=0.240, BF 01 =2.68;  Figure 3C , ‘75–95 ms’). Funding Statement   The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication. Contributor Information   Samuel Noorman, Email: sgnoorman@gmail.com.   Peter Kok, University College London, United Kingdom.   Tirin Moore, Stanford University, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, United States. Funding Information   This paper was supported by the following grant:    HORIZON EUROPE European Research Council  10.3030/715605 to Simon van Gaal. Additional information   Competing interests     No competing interests declared.   Reviewing editor, eLife.   Author contributions     Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.   Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.   Conceptualization, Supervision, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.   Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.   Ethics   Human subjects: Informed consent and consent to publish was obtained from all participants. All procedures were approved by the ethics board of the Psychology department of the University of Amsterdam, under project number 2020-BC-12346. Additional files   MDAR checklist     elife-97900-mdarchecklist1.docx  (87.7KB, docx)    Data availability   Data related to this paper is available at  UvA/AUAS figshare . Code related to this paper is available at  UvA/AUAS figshare .   The following datasets were generated:    Noorman SG. 2024. Data: Perceptual and attentional impairments of conscious access involve distinct neural mechanisms despite equal task performance. UvA/AUAS figshare.      Noorman SG. 2024. Code: Perceptual and attentional impairments of conscious access involve distinct neural mechanisms despite equal task performance. UvA/AUAS figshare.   References       Alilović J, Lampers E, Slagter HA, van Gaal S. Illusory object recognition is either perceptual or cognitive in origin depending on decision confidence. PLOS Biology. 2023;21:e3002009.  doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002009.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     Angelucci A, Levitt JB, Walton EJS, Hupe JM, Bullier J, Lund JS. Circuits for local and global signal integration in primary visual cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2002;22:8633–8646. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-19-08633.2002.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     Angelucci A, Bressloff PC. Contribution of feedforward, lateral and feedback connections to the classical receptive field center and extra-classical receptive field surround of primate V1 neurons. Progress in Brain Research. 2006;154:93–120. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)54005-1.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [