>Methods   Reagents   Lipid standards were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids (Birmingham, AL, USA), MilliporeSigma (St. Louis, MO, USA), and NuChek Prep. (Elysian, MN, USA). Acetonitrile,  iso -propanol, chloroform, and methanol of chromatography- or mass-spectrometry-grade were purchased from MilliporeSigma and Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). Compressed gasses (helium and nitrogen of ultra-high purity) were obtained from Airgas (Dallas, TX, USA). Acetic and formic acids (each >99.9% purity), anhydrous ammonium formate (>99.995%), and leucine-enkephalin were purchased from MilliporeSigma. Mouse Meibomian Lipids   All animal procedures used in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and were conducted in accordance with the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision Research.  Soat1 +/−  founder mice on a C57BL/6J background were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (B6.129S4- Soat1 tm1Far /Pgn, Stock #007147; Bar Harbor, ME, USA). The targeted mutation resulted in  Soat1 -null mice, which do not have SOAT1 protein detected by immunoblotting samples from preputial gland, ovaries, and adrenals of these mice. MLs were extracted from the tarsal plates of WT and KO mice by following procedures detailed elsewhere. 19  Four tarsal plates from each mouse were excised from the eyelids, dissected free from epidermis, and placed in glass vials filled with approximately 0.5 mL of chloroform:methanol ( v/v  2:1) for overnight extraction in a refrigerator. The lipids were repetitively extracted with 3 × 1 mL of the solvent mixture, and the extracts were pooled. To collect enough lipid material for biophysical evaluation, ML samples from three male WT mice and three male KO mice were combined in glass vials to produce two pooled WT and KO ML study samples. Then, the samples were dried under a stream of nitrogen and weighed on an analytical microbalance, to produce pooled off-whitish-to-yellowish oily samples of sufficient physical size of about 0.5 mg each, and compared using ultrahigh-pressure liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS; see lipidomic analysis below). The solvent was evaporated under a gentle stream of nitrogen. The remaining lipid materials were sealed and stored at −20°C until analyses. Lipidomic Analysis   ML samples were analyzed using UHPLC-MS. The liquid chromatography (LC) instrument was a Waters M-Class UHPLC binary system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). Separation of lipids was conducted on an Acquity C8-BEH UHPLC column (2.0 mm × 100 mm, 1.7 µm) using isocratic elution with a 95% isopropanol: 5% acetonitrile (each with 5% of 10 mM aqueous ammonium formate as additive) solvent mixture as described before. 19  The elutions were conducted at a flow rate of 20 µL/min, with a column temperature of 35°C. The MS instrument was a high resolution quadrupole Time-of-Flight Synapt G2-Si system equipped with a ZSpray atmospheric pressure ionization LC interface, an IonSabre-II atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) ion source and a LockSpray unit. The LockSpray was used with a 2 µg/mL Leucine-Enkephalin solution in 50% H 2 O: 50% acetonitrile: 0.1% formic acid as calibrant (Waters Corp.). The lipid analytes were detected in positive ion mode as prominent (M + H) + , (M − H 2 O + H) + , and (M − fatty acid + H) +  adducts. The APCI detector was used with the following settings: mode “Sensitivity”; resolution 10,000 FWHP; scan rate 1 scan/sec; corona current 1.7 µA; probe temperature 350°C; source temperature 150°C; sampling cone 30 V; cone gas flow (nitrogen) 100 L/hour; desolvation gas flow 400 L/hour; nebulizer gas pressure 3 bar; and the trap gas flow (ultra-high purity helium) 2 mL/min. The accuracy of measured  m/z  values for lipid analytes was better than 5 mDa.   The UHPLC-MS raw data were analyzed with the MassLynx version 4.1 software package (Waters Corp.). The total ion chromatograms (TICs) and extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) were used to estimate, respectively, the total lipid content and the apparent abundances of individual analytes, as described before. 19  Briefly, the signals for EIC were extracted with a mass window of 10 mDa, plotted, and integrated using the MassLynx's Integration routine. The results were statistically analyzed with the SigmaStat version 3.5 software (Systat Software, San Jose, CA, USA). Reproducibility of the analyses was established in a series of repetitive injections of samples and standard lipids as described earlier 28  and found to be better than ±5%. Dynamic Surface Activity   Dynamic surface activity of the mouse MLF was studied with CDS, 22 , 24  in which the MLF film can be spread at the air-water surface of an approximately 4 mm sessile drop enclosed in an environmental control chamber. As shown in  Figure 1 , the MLF is constrained at the air-water surface of the sessile drop using a pedestal with knife-sharp edges. The MLF film can be compressed and expanded by regulating the surface area of the droplet using closed-loop axisymmetric drop shape analysis (CL-ADSA), 29  which determines surface tension from the shape of the droplet. Surface pressure presents the differences between the surface tension of the clean air-water surface and that of the MLF-covered surface.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Schematics of the constrained drop surfactometry (CDS) as a versatile biophysical model for studying mouse MLFs. The CDS uses the air-water surface of a 4-mm sessile drop, constrained on a carefully machined pedestal with knife-sharp edges, to accommodate the spread MLF. The droplet is enclosed in an environmental control chamber that maintains a constant temperature, relative humidity, and ambient airflow rate. The spread MLF can be compressed and expanded at a highly dynamic rate of 20% relative area per second to simulate a blink, by regulating fluid flow into and out of the droplet using a motorized syringe. Dynamic surface tension of the film is determined with closed-loop axisymmetric drop shape analysis (CL-ADSA), which measures surface tension of the film remotely by analyzing the shape of the MLF-covered droplet in real-time. The CDS is capable of multiple biophysical assays of the MLFs, including dynamic surface tension, interfacial dilational rheology, evaporation resistance, and ultrastructure and topography of the MLFs when being used in conjunction with the Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) technique and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Specifically, approximately 0.1 µL mouse ML samples at approximately 1 mg/mL lipid concentration were spread onto the droplet surface, and left for 1 minute to allow solvent evaporation. The spread MLF was compressed to 30% of its initial surface area, at a rate of 20% relative area per second (A%/s), corresponding to 0.1 cm 2 /s, at 34.0 ± 0.1°C. At least five compression-expansion cycles were studied, and the fifth cycle was analyzed as representative. Dynamic surface activity of the MLF was quantified with the average film compressibility  κ  =  1 A ∂ A ∂ γ , and the hysteresis area of the compression-expansion loop. Surface Dilational Rheology   Protocols for determining the surface dilational modulus  E = d γ d l n A  of the mouse MLF can be found elsewhere. 24 , 30  Briefly, the surface area of the MLF film was made to undergo a small-amplitude (i.e. amplitude < 10%) harmonic oscillation (i.e. sinusoidal waveform) with frequencies from 0.01 to 0.25 Hz, at 34.0 ± 0.1°C. The elastic modulus ( E r ) and the viscous modulus ( E i ) were determined from the phase shift ( φ ) between the surface area and the surface tension waveforms. The ratio between  E i  and  E r  defines the loss tangent (tan φ ). Evaporation Resistance   Evaporation resistance of the mouse MLF was evaluated with a ventilated and closed-chamber evaporimeter recently developed in our laboratory. 26  As shown in  Figure 1 , this novel in vitro evaporimeter was designed based on the CDS. While studying water evaporation, the surface area of the droplet (A drop ) was maintained constant at 0.35 ± 0.01 cm 2  by automatically compensating the evaporated water with injection (ΔV/Δt) into the droplet within a time period of 5 minutes. The evaporation rate (mm/min) was calculated with (ΔV/Δt)/A drop . The relative humidity, temperature, and airflow rate were controlled at 33.0 ± 2.0%, 34.0 ± 0.1°C, and 1.0 ± 0.1 m/s, respectively. The volumetric evaporation rate for a pure water droplet, without any lipid or surfactant film at the air-water surface, was found to be less than 2.7 µL/min, in the similar range of the basal tear production of healthy adults. 31 , 32 Ultrastructure and Film Topography   Ultrastructure and topography of the mouse MLF were studied with combined Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) transfer technique and atomic force microscopy (AFM). 25  Plenty of experimental evidence has demonstrated that when being operated properly, the LB film transferred to a solid substrate is able to reserve the lateral structure and topography of the film at the air-water surface. 33 , 34  The MLF was first LB transferred to a freshly peeled mica sheet, and was then scanned in air with the tapping mode using an Innova AFM (Bruker, Santa Barbara, CA, USA). Statistical Analysis   Results were shown as mean ± SD ( n  ≥ 3). One-way ANOVA with Tukey's means comparison test was used to determine differences between groups (OriginPro, Northampton, MA, USA). A  P  < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. Results   Lipidomic Characterization of the Mouse Meibomian Samples     Figure 2  shows the lipidomic characterization of the ML samples extracted from the WT and KO mice. Compared with WT mice, the mutation resulted in a moderate 27% reduction in the total amount of produced MLs. Moreover,  Soat1  inactivation caused multiple changes in the composition of the meibomian lipidome of the KO mice, such as a 51% increase in the apparent abundance of triacylglycerols (TAGs), and a 39% decrease in total WEs (see  Fig. 2 a). Most importantly, the pool of Chl rose 7 times in the KO mice compared with their WT siblings, and, corroborating our previous results, 19  an almost complete removal of CEs longer than C 18  to C 20  was observed (see  Fig. 2 b). These changes transformed Chl into the main, most abundant lipid species produced by  Soat1 -null MGs with the apparent abundance of approximately 50% in the tested pool of lipids. Simultaneously, the apparent abundance of CEs dropped from 38% to 1.5% or so, of which all CEs were of shorter chains in nature. Other changes were an apparent decline in the WE content from 38% to 23%, and an increase in the TAG fraction from 17% to 23%.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Ultrahigh-pressure liquid chromatography –mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS) lipidomic characterization of the meibomian samples extracted from wild-type (WT) and  Soat1 -knockout (KO) mice. (a) Compositions of the MLs extracted from WT and KO mice. (b) Effect of  Soat1  inactivation on the ML profiles of mice. Note the major shifts in the Chl/CE ratio in the KO MLs, and a much subtler effect of the mutation on TAGs and WEs. Dynamic Surface Activity of the Mouse Meibomian Lipid Films     Figure 3  shows the comparison of dynamic surface activity of the MLF between WT and KO mice at the physiologically relevant temperature of 34°C.  Figure 3 a shows the typical compression-expansion isotherms of these two MLFs. Reproducibility of the compression-expansion isotherms can be found in  Supplementary Figure S1  of the  Supporting Information . It can be seen that both WT and KO MLFs can be compressed to a maximum surface pressure of approximately 50 mN/m, corresponding to a minimum surface tension of approximately 20 mN/m. However, as shown in  Figure 3 b, the compressibility (κ) of the KO MLF is lower than that of the WT MLF (1.33 vs. 1.75 m/mN), indicating that the MLF of KO mice is less compressible, or in other words, “harder” than the MLF of WT mice. Most importantly, as shown in  Figure 3 c, the hysteresis area of the KO MLF is found to be significantly larger than that of the WT MLF (0.13 vs. 0.37 µJ per cycle). The hysteresis area of a compression-expansion cycle indicates energy loss per cycle. 35  Hence, our results suggest that the energy loss per compression-expansion cycle for the MLF of KO mice is three times that of the healthy WT mice.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Dynamic surface activity of the MLFs of WT and KO mice at 34°C. ( a ) Typical compression-expansion isotherms of the WT and KO MLFs. ( b ) Statistical analysis of the compressibility (κ) of the WT and KO MLFs. ( c ) Statistical analysis of the hysteresis area, that is, the energy loss per cycle, for the WT and KO MLFs. * P  < 0.05 represents statistically significant differences. Interfacial Rheology of the Mouse Meibomian Lipid Films     Figure 4  shows the dilational rheological properties of the MLFs of the WT and KO mice. All rheological properties were determined at 34°C and a characteristic surface pressure of 30 mN/m, corresponding to the surface tension of whole tear. 24 , 36  As shown in  Figure 4 a, the elastic modulus (E r ) of the KO MLF almost doubles that of the WT MLF at all tested frequencies, from 0.01 to 0.25 Hz, thus indicating that the MLF of the KO mice is significantly stiffer or more rigid than the WT mice. This conclusion is also consistent with the compressibility measurement shown in  Figure 3 b.  Figure 4 b shows the viscous modulus (E i ) of the MLFs. In comparison to the E r  measurements shown in  Figure 4 a, the E i  of all MLFs is significantly smaller than the corresponding E r , indicating that these MLFs are essentially more elastic than viscous. Moreover, the E i  of the KO MLF is higher than that of the WT MLF at all tested frequencies. Most importantly, as shown in  Figure 4 c, it is found that the loss tangent (tan φ = E i /E r ) of the KO MLF is in general smaller than that of the WT MLF. In addition, the tan φ  of both WT and KO MLFs appears to decrease with increasing frequency, which is consistent with the frequency-dependence of the phospholipid film but has an opposite frequency-dependence as a simplified model TF lipid layer consisting of behenyl oleate (BO), cholesteryl oleate (CO), phosphatidylcholine (PC), and palmitic-acid-9-hydroxy-stearic-acid (PAHSA; 40:40:15:5, respectively). 24   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Interfacial dilational rheological properties of the MLFs of WT and KO mice. ( a ) Elastic modulus (E r ) of the WT and KO MLFs. ( b ) Viscous modulus (E i ) of the WT and KO MLFs. ( c ) Loss tangent (tanφ) of the WT and KO MLFs. All interfacial rheological properties were determined at the characteristic surface pressure of 30 mN/m at 34°C. Evaporation Resistance of the Mouse Meibomian Lipid Films     Figure 5  shows the evaporation resistance of the MLFs of the WT and KO mice, upon increasing surface pressure of these MLFs. It can be seen that both WT and KO MLFs demonstrate statistically significant resistance to water evaporation, and the evaporation resistance increases with increasing surface pressure of the MLFs. Nevertheless, the MLF of the WT mice shows significantly higher resistance to water evaporation than the MLF of the KO mice, especially at high surface pressures. For instance, at 30 mN/m, the MLFs of the WT and KO mice reduce the water evaporation rate by 6.8% and 3.7%, respectively. At 50 mN/m, however, the MLFs of the WT and KO mice reduce the water evaporation rate by 11.9% and 5.6%, respectively, thus indicating that the evaporation resistance of the WT MLF more than doubles that of the KO MLF at this high surface pressure. In fact, linear regression of the data shown in  Figure 5  indicates that the dependence of the evaporation resistance on surface pressure for the WT MLF more than doubles that of the KO MLF, indicating that the MLF of WT mice has a much better retardation effect to water evaporation than the MLF of KO mice.   Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Effects of the MLFs of WT ( a ) and KO ( b ) mice, under various surface pressures, on water evaporation. * P  < 0.05, ** P  < 0.01, and *** P  < 0.001. Ultrastructure and Topography of the Mouse Meibomian Lipid Films     Figure 6  shows the ultrastructure and topography of the MLFs of WT and KO mice, at 3 characteristic surface pressures, that is, 20, 30, and 40 mN/m, obtained at 34°C. Reproducibility of these AFM images can be found in  Supplementary Figures S2 – S7 . As shown in  Figure 6 a, the WT MLF at a low surface pressure of 20 mN/m demonstrates a multilayered structure with a network of lipid folds 40 to 60 nm in height. This structure is very different from that of the simplified model TFLL investigated in our previous studies. 25 , 26  Single-component or four-component model lipid films at such low surface pressures typically exhibit a monolayer conformation. 25 , 26  With increasing surface pressure to 30 mN/m (see  Fig. 6 b), the WT MLF shows discrete bead-like structures, with a lateral diameter of approximately 1.4 µm and a height of approximately 15 nm, surrounded by coffee-ring-like structures of approximately 3 µm in diameter and approximately 4 nm in height. A similar structure has been detected in the model TFLL of BO:CO:PC:PAHSA (40:40:15:5, respectively) at the same surface pressure. 26  These bead-like structures are most likely formed by squeezed out nonpolar lipids in the MLF, due to their lack of affinity to the air-water surface. The height of the coffee-ring-like structures closely matches the thickness of fully hydrated lipid bilayers (i.e. approximately 4 nm). 37  Hence, they are most likely formed by dewetting-driven self-assembly of reverse micelles of polar lipids mixed with nonpolar lipids. 26  With further increasing the surface pressure to 40 mN/m (see  Fig. 6 c), the WT MLF is compressed into a lipid multilayer consisting of a compacted bilayer (approximately 4 nm in height) and large aggregates of 50 to 100 nm in height atop the compacted bilayer.   Figure 6.     Open in a new tab   Ultrastructure and topography of the MLFs of WT ( a-c ) and KO ( d-f ) mice at three characteristic surface pressures, that is, 20, 30, and 40 mN/m. All AFM images shown in the 2 middle rows have the same scanning area of 20 × 20 µm, and the same  z  range of 50 nm. Images in the top and bottom rows show the 3D renderings of the WT and KO MLFs, respectively.  Single-headed arrows  indicate the heights of the structures, while  double-headed arrows  indicate the lateral dimensions of the structures. The bar represents 5 µm. The MLF of the KO mice shows a completely different ultrastructure and topography in comparison to that of the WT mice. As shown in  Figure 6 d, the KO MLF at the low surface pressure of 20 mN/m shows only limited amounts of multilayered protrusions 10 to 30 nm in height. At 30 mN/m (see  Fig. 6 e), a large portion of the film is still covered with a monolayer, whereas only isolated multilayer protrusions appear in the MLF. At 40 mN/m (see  Fig. 6 f), the KO MLF still appears to be mostly in a monolayer conformation without significant amounts of multilayered structures detected even at this high surface pressure. Neither bead-like structures nor coffee-ring-like structures, as appearing in the WT MLF, are detected in the KO MLF. These structural variations are consistent with the compositional variations of the MLFs of the WT and KO mice, because the KO MLF lacks the most important nonpolar lipid, that is, CEs, but is enriched in Chl. Discussion   Composition-Structure-Functional Correlations Revealed by Comparison of the Meibomian Lipid Films Between WT and  Soat1 -Null Mice   Corroborating our previous result, 19  inactivation of  Soat1  almost completely eliminated long- and extremely long-chain CEs from meibum, and led to a multifold increase in non-esterified free Chl (see  Fig. 2 ). The remaining CEs were based on C 14  to C 18  fatty acids with 1, 2, or 3 double bonds, that is ,  similar to those found in serum of mice and humans. As a result of this, free Chl became the major lipid species found in ML of the  Soat1 -null mice, comprising ≥ 50% of the lipid pool. It is well known that Chl has a profound impact on the ML phase behavior. 38  Hence, it is not unexpected that enrichment of lipid mixtures (such as MLs) with Chl would noticeably change their rheological/thixotropic properties, especially at the physiologically relevant temperature around 34°C.   Indeed, in comparison to the MLF of healthy WT mice, we found multiple biophysical variations to the MLF of KO mice, and such biophysical variations appear to be closely correlated with the alternation of the ML profile. Both surface tension and interfacial