>Methods   Fragmentation algorithm   FIORA is designed to take advantage of the inherent power of graph neural networks to learn structural patterns and local neighborhoods around chemical bonds. Each molecular structure  M  is represented as a graph  G  with atoms for nodes and bonds for edges, which is common practise in computational chemistry. The molecular structure graphs are built from string representations, e.g., SMILES. FIORA operates on neutral molecular structures and only considers information about precursor charge ([M+H]+, [M-H]-) and other covariates at the very end. Fragment ions are modeled by the removal of edges in the graph, indicating singular bond cleavages.   A key concept of our method is that we explicitly model ion rearrangements through hydrogen losses. This is important for direct assignment of peaks to fragment ions and allows end-to-end prediction from the molecular structure graph  G  to the fragment ion space  F ( G ) . The latter is constructed as follows: Let  E ( G ) denote the set of edges in  G  and  G − e  the pair of subgraphs (fragments) that arise from removing edge  e  ∈  E ( G ). The fragment ion space is the set of all subgraphs and fragment ionizations, accounting for up to 4 hydrogen losses, i.e.,     F ( G ) = ⋃ e ∈ E ( G ) ⋃ F ∈ G − e [ F + H ] + , [ F ] + , [ F − H ] + , [ F − 2 H ] + , [ F − 3 H ] + .   1     For each molecular graph  G , FIORA predicts the precursor stability  σ  and the abundance values  θ f  for all  f ∈ F ( G ) . Both are combined using a  softmax  function to compute  fragment probabilities :     p ( f ) = exp θ f exp σ + ∑ f ′ ∈ F ( G ) exp θ f ′ .   2     Predicting abundance values  θ f  is conceptually related to the idea of  break tendency  values that were proposed by Allen et al. 22 , but here we extend this concept to individual fragment ions  f . In addition, the precursor stability  σ  allows to model abundances of the intact molecule under various conditions, such as different collision energies. Negative precursor molecules are treated analogously with negative fragment charges.   The MS/MS spectrum is reconstructed afterwards from the exact fragment ion m/z. Figure  8  illustrates the fragment ion prediction process of a single edge break and depicts the information flow in the graph network.   Fig. 8. Illustration of FIORA’s fragmentation algorithm using the central bond as an example.     Open in a new tab   FIORA learns the local neighborhood of the bond over several graph convolutions, as illustrated by the dotted arrows indicating the information flow. The learned molecular structure is outlined in blue. For visual clarity, only two graph convolutions are illustrated and arrows are directed towards the designated bond. Based on the bond features and surrounding substructure, fragment ion abundances (and neutral losses) are predicted. In this case, the prediction suggests a loss of two hydrogen atoms and the formation of a new double bond in the right fragment. Peak probabilities are reconstructed statistically considering precursor stability and the abundances of all other fragments. It is important to note that FIORA can be very well used recursively, since fragments are graphs themselves. However, multiple fragmentation steps make it significantly harder to assign ground truth ion probability during training or require other stochastic modeling approaches, such as a Monte Carlo Tree Search. Every assignment of fragment probability (derived from training spectra) bares the risk of introducing conflicts. These arise, when more than one structure can explain a peak, either by having the same or similar weight within the mass tolerance. With multiple fragmentation pathways leading to the same fragment (or fragments of similar weight), the number of conflicts increases dramatically. In favor of speed and more harmonious ion probability assignments we reduce the possible fragmentation events to one. Nevertheless, multi-step fragmentation should be investigated to refine the model in the future. Importantly, multiple bond cleavages from the same residue are already implicitly modeled by directly assigning probabilities to the end-product ions (observed peaks), thereby keeping the missing signal low for the most part. The impact of missing peaks is discussed in the section “The impact of single-step fragmentation”. Model architecture   FIORA uses a graph network model to predict the precursor stability  σ  and the fragment abundances  θ f  from a molecular graph  G . Since the fragment space  F ( G )  is produced from individual edge breaks, edge prediction can be directly used to infer fragment ion abundance  θ f . The prediction of  σ  is based on the whole graph representation.   Initially, atom features are encoded as vectors of integer numbers (for element type, number of hydrogen atoms bound, and ring type information) and are passed to an embedding layer for each number. The embedding dimension of 300 was determined empirically. Bond features are embedded similarly based on bond type and ring type information.   Mathematically, a graph network layer involves a permutation equivariant function  Q  updating the node (atom) features  X  into a latent representation  H  =  Q ( X ,  A ) using the connectivity of the graph or adjacency matrix  A . Definitions follow Bronstein et al. 43 . This is achieved by applying a shared permutation invariant function  ϕ  to all  x i  ∈  X  and to the features of their local neighborhoods  N i , where  ϕ  is a learnable function. In the general case of a message passing neural network, the layer-wise update function can be formulated as     h i = ϕ ( x i , ⊕ j ∈ N i ψ ( x i , x j ) ) ,   3     where  h i  ∈  H  describes the new hidden representation of node  i ,  ⊕ is a permutation invariant aggregation operator, e.g., the sum (∑), and  ψ  is a learnable  message  function. Based on the choice of  ϕ  and  ψ , various types of graph layers can be modeled.   The type of graph network FIORA uses is customizable. Our implementation is based on the PyTorch Geometric library 44 , which provides many graph network architectures. Currently, FIORA supports GCN 45 , RGCN 46 , GAT 47  and Graph Transformer layers 48 . After each layer an Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) activation function is applied. The choice of graph network and layer depth is discussed in the section “Model selection”. We use a 6-layer RGCN as default.   After applying the graph convolutions, the hidden node (atom) representations are taken as input to the final prediction using blocks of fully connected neural networks, which are separate for different prediction targets. For fragment ion prediction, we implement an edge map to concatenate and stack features of all the two node combinations connecting an edge. In addition, the respective edge embedding and covariates (molecular weight, precursor ion mode, collision energy, and instrument type) are concatenated. A fully connected neural network with two layers projects the input onto a 10-dimensional output vector of logits, representing fragment ion abundance  θ f  for the 5 ion modes and for both sides of the modeled edge break. The precursor abundance  σ  is estimated from the entire graph embedding using a global mean pooling aggregation, concatenated with the same covariates. Two additional fully connected layers produce a single logit  σ . All logits (abundance values) are concatenated and passed through a  softmax  function to model precursor and fragment ions as a probability distribution. For model training, a weighted mean squared error (MSE) loss is computed between the predicted and observed fragment probabilities. The latter are estimated in advance by matching peaks to the fragment space using square root intensities. The loss is weighted by 1 over the number of spectra available per compound to reduce the bias towards compounds with multiple entries in the libraries. Network parameters are optimized using ADAM 49 .   Finally, the MS/MS spectrum is produced by tracing back predicted subgraphs (fragments) using the edge map and reconstructing the exact peak m/z from fragment weight and hydrogen losses. Ion probabilities are summed to obtain peak intensities because multiple ions can produce the same peak.   RT and CCS values are predicted based on the mean-pooled graph embedding. This is similar to precursor intensity prediction, but with a distinct set of weights and the standard MSE loss function. Hyperparameters were not specifically tuned for this task and training was performed after the fragment ion prediction, freezing all but the relevant dense layers that produce the RT and CCS estimates. Data preparation   Experimental MS/MS data of metabolites is diverse. Different data formats and units must be aligned across all measurements, particularly with regards to metadata. Metadata describes experimental conditions and is crucial to understanding and predicting compound fragmentation. We made significant efforts to collect data from various sources and align the information as accurately as possible. This enables our model to utilize covariate information, such as collision energy or instrument type, but requires extensive data pre-processing. Nevertheless, data preparation is a critical factor influencing model performance. The following section provides detailed information on the most important pre-processing steps.   Our setup relies on three spectral libraries. The first is NIST’17 35 , which contains a large collection of MS/MS spectra acquired from authentic compound standards. The library was converted to .msp format using the  lib2nist  program that is included with the NIST library. Compound information was exported in the .MOL format and then parsed back into the spectral library using the Python  rdkit  package. For a detailed walkthrough of all library parsing steps, please refer to our script on GitHub (found at  https://github.com/BAMeScience/fiora/blob/main/lib_loader/nist_library_loader.ipynb ) 34 . It is important to note that NIST’17 is a commercial library requiring a license, which severely limits its public use. The homogeneity of the data may also limit its ability to generalize to more diverse experimental setups. The NIST’17 MS/MS library does not provide information about RT and CCS values of the measured compounds.   In addition to NIST’17, we process a public library available in .msp format on the MS-DIAL website 36 , which contains a collection of annotated MS/MS spectra from various other spectral libraries, such as MassBank and GNPS. Unlike most of the public libraries, the MS-DIAL spectral library standardizes metadata, making crucial information about collision energy, RT and CCS readily accessible.   Lastly, we use the recently published MSnLib v1.0 (10.5281/zenodo.11163381) 37 , which contains over a million multi-stage fragmentation spectra, including 177,390 MS/MS spectra for 15,967 unique compounds. An overview of all three spectral libraries can be found in Supplementary Table  5 .   All libraries are pre-processed in a similar fashion, converting normalized collision energies (NCE) to electron Volts (eV) where possible, using the formula from the Proteomicsnews blogpost ( https://proteomicsnews.blogspot.com/2014/06/normalized-collision-energy-calculation.html ) 50 . MS/MS spectra with missing collision energies or unclear formats were excluded. Compounds with inconsistencies between SMILES, MOL format and InChiKeys were filtered out immediately. In addition, we filtered for ionization types [M+H]+ and [M-H]- (in case of MSnLib [M]+ and [M]- ions were considered as well) and imposed requirements for spectra to be selected for training. These requirements included a maximum weight of 1000 Da and maximum collision energy of 100 eV. Compounds were fragmented by single edge removal, and peaks were matched at 50 ppm (10 ppm for MSnLib) to the set of fragment ions described in the “Fragmentation algorithm” section. Note that the fragment tolerance for NIST and MS-DIAL is quite lenient, since high machine accuracy could not be guaranteed for all spectra. For ambiguous fragment matches that can explain the same peak, equal probability was assigned to each fragment. The fragment matches are then used to determine the final data set containing spectra suitable for training. We enforced at least two peak matches, a minimum peak intensity coverage of 50%, and a maximum precursor intensity of 90%. Then, soft filters required that each spectrum have either 50% of the total peaks or at least five peaks matched by fragments, or an exceptionally high intensity coverage of 0.8. This ensured that there is sufficient overlap between the theoretical fragmentation patterns and the observed peaks. We combine the NIST and MS-DIAL libraries into a single training library for the standard FIORA model. In this way, the library has a size comparable to that of CFM-ID’s training set, comprising 74,401 spectra from 10,692 compounds. Additionally, we prepared the MSnLib data to train a separate fully open-source model. Training and testing   FIORA was trained on 80% of the molecular structures, with the remaining 20% split evenly between validation and testing. The training process consisted of 200 epochs using the ADAM optimizer, a weighted MSE loss and a scheduler that reduces the learning rate upon reaching a plateau in validation loss. The model checkpoint with the lowest validation loss was loaded afterwards. Hyperparameters were tuned mostly empirically using the validation set. The types of graph layer and model depth are systematically evaluated in the “Model selection” section. Exact model specification can be found in the  Supplementary Information .   ICEBERG was trained using identical training and validation splits, and following the training steps provided at the original GitHub repository ( https://github.com/samgoldman97/ms-pred ). We used the commit from October 21, 2023, which is slightly newer than the 1.0.0 release, as it contains a detailed retraining workflow. In the case of CFM-ID, we used the pre-trained model v4.4.7 running with a docker container provided on Docker Hub ( https://hub.docker.com/r/wishartlab/cfmid ). Retraining CFM-ID with our dataset was found computationally infeasible. An open-source version of FIORA was trained on the MSnLib spectra with the exact same model specifications.   In addition to the 10% test split from the NIST’17/MS-DIAL library and the 10% test split from MSnLib, we selected the CASMI 2016 and CASMI 2022 datasets for benchmarking. Both datasets were downloaded from the CASMI contest webpage at  http://casmi-contest.org . We selected [M+H]+ and [M-H]- precursors and set covariates according to the descriptions. In each case, as many compounds and spectra as possible were extracted, which includes the priority and bonus challenges for CASMI 22 and training as well as challenge spectra for CASMI 16. In the CASMI 16 challenge, a stepped collision energy was used, so we predicted spectra with FIORA for all 3 collision energies and merged them into a single “stepped" spectrum. CFM-ID predicts compound spectra at fixed collision energies of 10 eV, 20 eV and 40 eV. Therefore, we evaluated the prediction with the closest matching collision energy, following the approach of Wang et al. 23 . For CASMI 22, the extraction of the challenge spectra was more complicated. The OpenMS 51  library using its Python wrapper was used for reading the  mzml  file and for the extraction of the collision energy levels. Challenge spectra were extracted using a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and retention time window of 5 seconds. Multiple measurements at the same collison energy were merged into a consensus spectrum. Despite our efforts, not all collision energies for all challenge spectra were found. Reducing the stringency of the tolerance values did not solve this, as it lead to ambiguous matches to more than one compound. All processing steps are found on our GitHub ( https://github.com/BAMeScience/fiora/tree/main/lib_loader ) 34 . To preserve the integrity of the test results, all compounds from the test sets were removed from the training data for FIORA and ICEBERG. CFM-ID was trained on the METLIN 17  library, which means that this separation is not guaranteed. Evaluation metrics   Cosine similarity (Eq. ( 4 )) measures the similarity of two vectors,  A  = ( a i ) and  B  = ( b i ), in the inner product space. It is defined as the cosine of the angle  ρ  between the two vectors:     Cosine similarity ( A , B ) = cos ( ρ ) = A ⋅ B ∥ A ∥ ∥ B ∥ .   4     Furthermore, we define the coverage between  A  and  B  as:     Coverage ( A , B ) = ∑ i a i 1 b i > 0   5     To obtain the cosine similarity and coverage between MS/MS spectra, they need to be discretized along the m/z dimension. This is typically done by binning m/z values or by matching query and reference peaks and then assigning a dimension to each peak pair and each unmatched peak. The latter is specified in Equation ( 6 ), which defines the cosine similarity between the spectra  S A  and  S B  at a tolerance value  t  that determines whether two peaks match:     Spectral cosine similarity ( S A , S B , t ) = ∑ ( m z k , I k ) ∈ S A ∑ ( m z l , I l ) ∈ S B I k I l 1 ∣ m z k − m z l ∣ ≤ t ∑ ( m z k , I k ) ∈ S A I k 2 ∑ ( m z l , I l ) ∈ S B I l 2 .   6     Peaks are represented as tuples of m/z and intensity values ( m z k ,  I k ). Note that Equation ( 6 ) reflects the cosine angle only if peak matches are unique. This is not necessarily the case as multiple fragment predictions may have the same or very similar m/z. Therefore, intensities are summed within the tolerance window defined by  t , only for the purpose of spectral scoring. The spectral coverage of peak intensities is defined analogously based on the tolerance  t .   Although cosine similarity expertly describes the angle  ρ  between the spectral vectors in an inner product space, it has some practically shortcomings. Dominant (high-intensity) peaks have a dramatic effect on the cosine similarity, regardless of whether other low-intensity peaks are matched. As a result, the vanilla cosine similarity may not be indicative of how well low-intensity fragmentation patterns are reflected. This problem is exacerbated by a small number of peaks. Solutions are hyperscores, which take into account the number of matched peaks and are used in proteomics 52  or logarithmic or square root transformations of the initial peak intensities, which even out differences in peak intensity and de-emphasize dominant peaks. In this study, all results use the cosine similarity of squar