>Methods   Overview   The SIMILE algorithm calculates spectral similarity by aligning substitutable fragments, identification of the significance of their alignment; and scoring the degree to which two spectra are correlated. The underlying mathematical framework for these calculations is described below. Python code for each step is available in the GitHub repository ( https://github.com/biorack/simile ) as the release “v1_manuscript-submission”. Figure  2  illustrates the SIMILE algorithm with two hypothetical molecules. SIMILE can be evaluated interactively alongside other scoring algorithms in the GNPS Similarity Hub (example result for SIMILE scores and  p -values calculated—Hub Link) where spectra from [M + H] + adducts for N-acetyl-5-hydroxytryptamine and 5-hydroxy-DL-tryptophan are scored.   The fragmentation process in tandem mass spectrometry can be modeled as a network of fragmentation paths connecting precursor ions to product ions with fragmentation reactions 34 . In addition, it is broadly assumed that similar structures fragment similarly. If this assumption holds, a similarity measure for fragment ions, which considers their fragmentation paths ought to be a good proxy for their structural similarity and, when aggregated, the similarity of the intact structures. To find such a similarity measure, we rely on the following observation: a modification to a molecule can add and/or remove fragmentation reactions to fragmentation paths. For modified fragmentation paths that do not remove fragmentation reactions, there will be a one-to-one substitution from the original fragment ions to modified fragment ions. The  m/z  differences cross-linking such fragmentation paths will be characteristic of the modification and their frequency proportional to the similarity of the fragmentation paths.   Because we do not know fragmentation paths for fragment ions in general, we consider the frequency of all pairwise  m/z  differences. While the frequency of  m/z  differences alone suffices in providing a “shortest path” distance between fragment ions, it remains insensitive to fragmentation paths. After all, a single common  m/z  difference between two fragment ions may very well be spurious. Instead, we are interested in consistent  m/z  differences cross-linking the same sets of fragment ions that are more likely to result from similar fragmentation paths.   For this reason, we use the average “commute time” of fragment ions as our distance measure that considers all paths weighted by  m/z  difference frequencies. Specifically, SIMILE works by projecting fragment ions into a Euclidean commute time distance (ECTD) space dependent on the frequency and connectivity of the  m/z  differences between them.   We rely on the variance–covariance matrix with respect to ECTD space for the remainder of the SIMILE algorithm because it forms a valid kernel (i.e., similarity function in the strict mathematical sense), which we denote the SIMILE similarity matrix. When comparing fragmentation spectra A and B, it is important to note that intraspectral (i.e., A vs. A) and interspectral (i.e., A vs. B) comparisons are considered in tandem by forming a square (A + B) by (A + B) similarity matrix. This is critical, because our  p -value exchanges fragment ions between the A and B and so the fragment ions must be projected into the same space.   In order to quantify the similarity of fragmentation spectra A and B, the SIMILE similarity matrix is used in conjunction with a dynamic programming algorithm related to those used for pairwise alignment of biological sequences. For the sum of the similarities in the alignment, we denote the SIMILE alignment score and use as a proxy for compound similarity.   While alternatives to  m/z  order-based alignment of fragment ions exist such as maximum weight matching (aka Hungarian algorithm or linear sum assignment optimization), there is a reason as to why one may prefer alignment. Because SIMILE projects fragment ions into a space dependent on the frequency of  m/z  differences and not the magnitude of those differences, it is possible for similar fragment ions to have very different masses. However, one would naturally expect large mass differences to imply comparatively less structural similarity than smaller mass differences. By using alignment instead of maximum weight matching, we are in effect forcing the score to address this trade- off albeit stochastically. While alignment is not guaranteed to appropriately match similar fragment ions (Fig.  SI6b ), we found alignment to perform well in predicting structural similarity.   Ideally, SIMILE would align fragment ions that are substitutions with respect to their fragmentation paths. We assume that substitutable ions are more similar to each other than to their precursor or product ions. If this were not the case, then such precursor ions could be considered substitutable with its product ions that break the one-to-one correspondence definition of substitutability. To this end, we construct a random permutation test for the robustness of the SIMILE alignment score to invasion by precursor/product similarity scores. If the observed SIMILE alignment score is consistently higher than those from the null distribution, then we cannot reject the aligned ions being substitutable. By default 10, 100, and 1000 iterations of the permutation are performed, and that early stopping occurs when the  p -value does not improve by twofold. Compute time   While calculating the  p -value is of time complexity O(knm) where there are k permutations of n-by-m similarity matrices, three key optimizations in the implementation details confer significant speedup by enabling vectorized operations. This effectively moves k times max(n,m) of the operations out of Python and into highly optimized compiled C code. One, because the gap penalty is zero and only the alignment score is needed (not the alignment), we can replace the O(nm) dynamic programming implementation for alignment with a single-loop iterating over min(n,m) in Python to greedily compute the alignment score using alternating vectorized maximum and rolling maximum operations. Two, the k-by-n-by-m array consisting of “stacks” of permuted similarity matrices is constructed by broadcasting the similarity matrix using k random permutation indices that minimize needless data copying. Three, because permuted similarity matrices are stacked, the alignment of each stack is independent of one another, and the underlying alignment-score operation is partially vectorized, we extend the vectorized alignment- score operation to operate on each stack in a vectorized fashion. On a modern Linux workstation and at a  p -value of 0.0001, we found the average compute time to be 20 milliseconds for SIMILE comparisons within NIST20 without any parallelization (Figure  SI2 ). For comparisons that have a very low SIMILE  p -value, the computation can take up to 10 seconds, but this is extremely rare within the NIST20 comparisons. Early stopping can restrict  p -value calculations to a  p -value of 0.01 and shorten this calculation time by approximately a factor of 100. For spectra with 100 s of ions that align extremely well, the compute time can be even longer. This is a limitation, and would increase the time to calculate the all-by-all comparisons, for datasets rich in these types of spectra. Similarity matrix   Construction of a pair-specific  m/z  similarity matrix takes the concatenation of two ordered  m/z  lists from fragmentation spectra X of length  m  and Y of length  n  as input. The pairwise (outer) difference of the concatenated  m/z  list is stored in an  m  +  n  by  m  +  n m/z  difference matrix,  D . (Fig.  2a ). The  m/z  difference matrix  D  is delineated by four quadrants: X minus X (e.g., all of the intraspectral differences in X) in the top-left m by m, Y minus Y (e.g., all of the intraspectral differences in Y) in the bottom-right n by n, X minus Y in the top-right m by n, and Y minus X (e.g., all of the interspectral differences between X and Y) in the bottom-left n by m. In Fig.  2 , only the top-right quadrant is shown to illustrate  m/z  differences, frequencies of specific differences, and ion similarity scores comparing the two hypothetical molecules, but all four quadrants are used in the calculation. For each element  D ij  of the top m by m + n quadrants of  D , the  m/z  differences in the block that are within a given  m/z  tolerance window of  D ij  are counted and element-wise assigned to the  m/z  difference frequency matrix,  C  (Fig.  2b ). Repeat the procedure to fill the bottom n by m + n quadrants of  C  using the bottom m by m + n block of  D .   To calculate a similarity matrix from the  m/z  frequency matrix, we used the approach described by Li et al. 20 . Dividing each row of the  m/z  difference count matrix  C  by the sum of the row yields the  m/z  transition matrix  T . Each element  T ij  describes the probability of the  i th   m/z  from the concatenated  m/z  list transitioning to the  j th   m/z . As such, the transition matrix defines a Markov chain representation of the  m/z  values from fragmentation spectra X and Y. Let  I  be the m + n by m + n identity matrix, defined as having ones along the diagonal and zeros elsewhere. Let  p  be the stationary probability distribution of the  m/z  transition matrix  T , defined by the property that  pT  =  p . The stationary probability distribution  p  is calculated by dividing the principal eigenvector of  T  by its sum. The directed graph Laplacian  L  of  C  is defined as  p 1/2 (I - T)p −1/2 . Finally, the  m/z  similarity matrix  S  is calculated by taking the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse of ( L  +  L T )/2. S XX  and  S YY  are defined as the top-left m-by-m quadrant and the bottom-right n-by-n quadrant of  S , respectively. Likewise,  S XY  and  S YX  are defined as the top-right m-by-n quadrant and the bottom-left n-by-m quadrant of  S , respectively. Alignment and alignment score   The alignment and alignment score are calculated using the dynamic programming approach described by Needleman and Wunsch for sequence alignments, but with a fixed gap penalty of zero 32 . It is defined by the recurrence relation     A ( i , j ) = max A ( i − 1 , j − 1 ) + S ij A ( i − 1 , j ) A ( i , j − 1 )   1     with initial conditions  A ( i ,0) = 0 for all  i  and  A (0, j ) = 0 for all  j . The terminal value of  A  is the alignment score and tracing back the elements of  S , Bhich contribute to this score, yields the alignment. Alignment significance   The significance of the alignment is calculated via a permutation test with the alignment score used as test statistic under the null hypothesis that  m/z  values are exchangeable between  m/z- ordered fragmentation spectra X and Y only if they generate fragmentation spectra X′ and Y′ that are also  m/z  ordered. This null hypothesis corresponds to the assumption that exchanging interspectral similarity scores in  S XY  and  S YX  with intraspectral similarity scores in  S XX  and  S YY  improves alignment scores so long as  m/z  order is preserved in the resulting  S X′Y′  and  S Y′X′ .   Rather than compute every valid permutation of  S  to calculate the  p -value, we use Monte Carlo testing with early stopping to asymptotically approach the true  p -value with bounded and known error 35 . In practice, this is done by first generating a random permutation of indices that index the concatenated  m/z  list, such that the first  n  entries are  m/z  ordered and the last  m  entries are  m/z  ordered, which implicitly generates hypothetical fragmentation spectra X′ and Y′. This permutation of indices is then used to permute the rows and columns of  S  symmetrically. The alignment score is calculated with the alignment algorithm described above. The  p -value is then the probability that a random alignment score from the empirical distribution is greater than the observed alignment score or one out of the number of iterations, whichever is greater (Fig.  1h ). A score cutoff greater than or equal to 0.7, a  p -value cutoff less than or equal to 0.05, and a number of matching ion cutoff greater than or equal to 10 were used to identify similar spectra for the majority of calculations in this work. Validation and development dataset   The algorithm was developed and validated using tandem mass spectra from the commercially available electrospray ionization spectra available from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST 2020) library. These spectra are acquired on a variety of instruments (Supplementary Table  1 ) under a variety of conditions. They were filtered to include only [M–H] −  adducts for negative-mode comparisons and [M + H]+ adducts for positive-mode comparisons, and the closest collision energy to 40 eV within 5 eV (SI Fig.  1 ). Many other collision energies are available for study, but we limited this to one specific value for the sake of defining a highly controlled set of comparisons. Future studies can extend to 0 V, 20 V, 40 V, 60 V, 80 V, and 100 V to identify the optimum collision energy for assessing similarity with tandem mass spectra. Each compound was assigned to a chemical class using the ClassyFire web service 36 . For each unique inchi key, a JSON file containing the chemical class was retrieved from the web service by the following URL  http://classyfire.wishartlab.com/entities/ik.json  where ik is the inchi key for the compound. While this JSON file provides predicted compound kingdom, superclass, class, and subclass, only the class was retained for this analysis. Spectral similarity algorithms   In general, the following score cutoffs for each algorithm are based on the published parameters. For CSS and SIMILE, the development teams worked together to select parameters for the comparisons. As is stated above, for SIMILE, a score cutoff greater than or equal to 0.7, a  p -value cutoff less than or equal to 0.05 and a number of matching ion cutoff greater than or equal to 10 were used to identify similar spectra for all calculations in this work (with the exception of the Napsamycin molecular network). The MatchMS python package version 0.6.2 was used to calculate the modified cosine spectral similarity score and determine the number of matching ions 21 . Each spectrum was square-root intensity scaled and further normalized using the MatchMS function “normalize_intensities”. Pairs of spectra were evaluated with the modified_cosine.pair() function, a scoring algorithm that includes precursor loss masses and intensities. A score cutoff greater than or equal to 0.6 and a number of matching ions greater than or equal to 6 were used to identify similar spectra.   The Core Structure-based Search (CSS) algorithm was rewritten in C# for large-scale spectral comparison 5 . For each MS/MS spectrum, top-30 fragments (sorted by intensity) were reserved, and peak intensities were subject to normalization and square-root transformation. The maximum number of hypothetical neutral losses (HNLs) was set to 100, and the minimum HNL mass was set to 36. Both CSS score and CSS match number were output to optimize the cutoffs for similar spectra. A score cutoff greater than or equal to 0.6 and a match number cutoff greater than or equal to 40 was used to identify similar spectra.   GNPS-aligned cosine spectral similarity was written in C++ for large-scale comparisons and run externally of GNPS’ molecular networking to benchmark the scoring function in isolation of molecular networking. This was done specifically because the molecular networking workflows introduce other heuristic processing algorithms that increase the interpretability of the molecular networks that interfere with benchmarking. MS/MS spectra were aligned and scored with a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da. A score cutoff greater than or equal to 0.6 and a number of matching ions greater than or equal to 6 were used to identify similar spectra. Molecular networking   Following the calculation of all-by-all SIMILE scores, filtering both by score cutoffs and topology is required to make an interpretable network. The all-by-all scores were filtered to remove scores less than 1.0 and  p -value greater than 0.05 for SIMILE. This is a more strict threshold than was used in the NIST20 data. Finally, the network topology was constrained first to preserve only the 10 top-scoring edges and second to constrain subgraph size to 100 nodes or less. This resulting SIMILE network was merged with the existing network based on GNPS-cosine scores. The existing GNPS network was created using the same topological filters as were used for SIMILE. Maximum common substructure (MCS)   The chemical similarity metric used in this paper is the Jaccard similarity coefficient,  s , of the overlapping bonds given by  s  =  N  / (( N A  +  N B ) −  N ) where  N  is the number of overlapping bonds between the pair of molecules  A  and  B .  N A  and  N B  are the number of bonds in each of the molecules A and B, respectively. The alignment of a connected block between each pair of molecules is done using the RDKIT python package with a timeout of 1800 seconds and ringMatchesRingOnly set to False 37 . One pair of compounds timed out and was discarded from further analysis. Here we refer to the MCS Jaccard similarity of bonds as MCS. Reporting summary   Further information on research design is available in the  Nature Research Reporting Summary  linked to this article. Supplementary information     Supplementary Information  (2.7MB, pdf)      Reporting Summary  (255.9KB, pdf)    Acknowledgements   This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science by ENIGMA-Ecosystems and Networks Integrated with Genes and Molecular Assemblies ( http://enigma.lbl.gov ), a Science Focus Area Program at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; the U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute (JGI), a DOE Office of Science User Facility; the Machine Learning for Chemistry Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program; and the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a DOE Office of Science User Facility, all under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 with the U.S. Department of Energy. Author contributions   D.G.C.T. and B.P.B. conceived the project. D.G.C.T. and B.P.B. developed the software for SIMILE. B.P.B., T.R.N., M.W., and P.C.D. provided guidance and supervision. D.G.C.T., M.W., S.X., T.H., and B.P.B. tested SIMILE and developed the analysis and figures. M.W. developed the GNPS implementations. T.R.N. provided funding for the project. D.G.C.T., T.R.N., and B.P.B. wrote the draft paper. All authors edited and approved the final paper. Peer review   Peer review information   Nature Communications  thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Data availability   Raw spectra for the work presented here came from three sources. For the majority of the analysis, the commercially available NIST20 Tandem Mass Spectral Library was used. Further analysis of molecular networking from Streptomyces isolates used a molecular network available in GNPS 3 . In addition, the flavonoid and indole comparison network was based on the publicly available Berkeley Lab GNPS library. Code availability   The SIMILE algorithm and example Jupyter notebooks are available on Github at  https://github.com/biorack/simile/  and tagged as a release-labeled version 1. Competing interests   PCD is an advisor to Cybele and a cofounder and advisor to Ometa and Enveda with approval by UC-San Diego. The remaining authors declare no competing interests. Footnotes   Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary information   The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-022-30118-9. References       1. Stein SE, Scott DR. Optimization and testing of mass spectral library search algorithms for compound identification. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 1994;5:859–866. doi: 10.1016/1044-0305(94)87009-8.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     2. Cooper BT, et al.  Hybrid search: a method for identifying metabolites absent from tandem mass spectrometry libraries. Anal. Chem. 2019;91:13924–13932. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03415.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3. Wang M, et al.  Sharing and community curation of mass spectrometry data with Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking. Nat. Biotechnol. 2016;34:828–837. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3597.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     4. Watrous J, et al.  Mass spectral molecular networking of living microbial colonies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 2012;109:E1743–E1752. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1203689109.  [