>Materials and methods   Participants   Data used in the present analysis were from two ongoing TMS-EEG studies at the Berenson-Allen Center for Noninvasive Brain Stimulation at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. All participants provided written informed consent before enrollment according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Both studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA. The first cohort consists of 10 healthy adult control participants (9 M/1F, age = 42.2 ± 18.8 yrs., range = 19 to 65) from a TMS-EEG study of epilepsy 3 . The second cohort consisted of 24 older adults, collected as part of a study of postoperative delirium called The Successful Aging after Elective Surgery study (SAGES; 10 M/14F, age = 72.0 ± 6.6 yrs., range = 65 to 89) 55 . Participants selected for SAGES did not have clinical dementia, were scheduled for major surgery, and we used pre-surgery baseline TMS-EEG visit data for this analysis. We replicated and validated the findings from the first cohort (healthy younger adult) with the second cohort (older adult). The two cohorts represent different age groups, sham TMS protocols, and TMS-EEG systems, and are therefore ideal for addressing the robustness and strengths/weaknesses of this structured ICA-based approached to isolating AEP from TEP independent of experimental design. Transcranial magnetic brain stimulation set-up and procedure   In the younger cohort, TMS was delivered using a Nexstim eXimia stimulator with real-time MRI neuronavigation (NBS software v3.2.1; Nexstim, Helsinki, Finland), following standard protocols 56 . Single TMS pulses were applied to left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L DLPFC), left intra-parietal lobule (L IPL) and a sham condition to left M1 delivered with an active coil tilted away from the scalp at 90°. DLPFC and IPL were anatomically defined, respectively, as the superior half of the middle frontal gyrus approximately 3 cm anterior to precentral sulcus and the superior edge of angular gyrus roughly 1 cm inferior to intraparietal sulcus. Coil orientation was set with coil handle perpendicular to the targeted gyri inducing a biphasic anterior–posterior—posterior-to-anterior current in the underlying cortex. No auditory noise masking or electrical stimulation was used. Participants were asked to wear earplugs during sham and active-TMS trials to protect their hearing. Throughout the visit, participants were seated in an adjustable chair. The motor hotspot for eliciting motor evoked potentials (MEPs) in the right first dorsal interosseous (FDI) muscle was determined by delivering single pulse TMS to the hand knob of left motor cortex with the coil tangential to the scalp and oriented orthogonal to the motor strip (~ 45° from anterior–posterior midline) and searching around until finding the site where the largest and most consistent MEPs were produced in FDI. Resting motor threshold (RMT) was then determined as the minimum stimulation intensity (% of maximum stimulator output) needed to elicit MEPs ≥ 50 µV in the relaxed FDI in at least 5 out of 10 pulses. Following determination of RMT, 120 single pulses of TMS were applied at 120% RMT with randomly jittered inter-stimulus intervals (3–5 s). TMS operators monitored participants for wakefulness. See Vink et al. 57  for more details.   In the older cohort, TMS was delivered using a figure-of-eight shaped coil with dynamic fluid cooling, a biphasic waveform, and anterior–posterior–posterior-anterior current direction in the brain (MagVenture Cool-B65) attached to a Magpro X100 stimulator, following standard protocols 56 . MagVenture Cool-B65 A/P coil was used with a 2.7 cm thick plastic spacer for sham stimulation and white noise masking was presented through earplug-earbuds at the maximum volume comfortable for each participant. Participants were asked to rate the perceived loudness of the TMS “click” while listening to the noise, relative to no noise-masking (0–10 scale, with 0 = “could not hear” and 10 = “as loud with noise and without noise”), and the average loudness rating was 6 ± 4. Four subjects reported “click” loudness ratings equal to 0. Although auditory noise masking was used in the older cohort, 20 participants reported hearing the TMS “click” and had AEPs. These 20 participants were used for all pre/post AEP removal comparisons (7M/13F, age = 71.9 ± 5.8 years, range = 65 to 86). Small current pulses (between 2 and 4 mA) were delivered over the left forehead, over the frontalis muscle, using surface electrodes (Ambu Neuroline 715) to approximate somatosensory sensations arising from skin mechanoreceptors and scalp muscles during the active-TMS condition. The motor hotspot for eliciting motor evoked potentials (MEPs) in the right FDI muscle was determined by delivering single pulse TMS to the hand knob of left motor cortex with the coil tangential to the scalp and oriented orthogonal to the central sulcus/motor strip (~ 45° from mid-sagittal plane) and varying the location and orientation until the largest and most consistent MEPs were produced in FDI. RMT was determined as the minimum stimulation intensity needed to elicit MEPs ≥ 50 µV in the relaxed FDI in at least 5 out of 10 trials. Following determination of the FDI hotspot and RMT, 120 single pulses of TMS were applied at 120% RMT with randomly jittered inter-stimulus intervals (3–5 s) to the DLPFC and IPL targets, and sham TMS over M1. To select the non-motor targets in the SAGES cohort, group-level resting-state functional networks maps were used based on a 7 networks parcellation covering cortical and subcortical structures 58 . Confidence maps for each RSN were used, representing the confidence of each vertex belonging to its assigned network across a sample of 1000 healthy participants (expressed as valued between − 1 and 1), with larger values indicating higher confidence. By using group-level functional parcellations and confidence maps on the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) template brain, we were able to target the most consistent and reliable regions within the left angular gyrus (L-IPL: − 55.1, − 70.5, 27.7) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L-DLPFC: − 50.5, 30.4, 31.8) that had the highest likelihood of occurring in the default mode and frontoparietal resting-state networks, respectively. A custom processing pipeline was developed to take each participant’s anatomical MRI, create a non-linear transform from the participant’s native space to MNI space and then use the inverse of that transform to bring back the coordinates into participant’s space using FSL’s FNIRT tool. The transformed coordinates along with individual high-resolution T1w images were then imported into the Brainsight TMS Frameless Navigation system (Rogue Research Inc., Montreal, Canada), and co-registered to digitized anatomical landmarks for online monitoring of coil positioning. TMS operators monitored participants for wakefulness. Electroencephalography acquisition and preprocessing   In the younger cohort, whole scalp 60-channel EEG was collected with a TMS-compatible amplifier (eXimia EEG, Nexstim Ltd) and labeled according to the extended 10–20 international system. EEG data were online referenced to an additional electrode on the forehead. Impedances were maintained below 5 kΩ at a sampling rate of 1450 Hz. EEG signals were digitized using a Nexstim amplifier. Digitized EEG electrode locations on the scalp were also co-registered to individual MRI scans using Nexstim Brainsight TMS Frameless Navigation system (Rogue Research Inc., Montreal, Canada). See Vink et al. 57  for more details.   In the older cohort, whole scalp 64-channel EEG was collected with a TMS-compatible amplifier (actiCHamp, Brain Products GmbH, Munich, Germany) and labeled according to the extended 10–20 international system. EEG data were online referenced to AFz. Impedances were maintained below 5kΩ at a sampling rate of 5000 Hz. EEG signals were digitized using a BrainVision amplifier (BrainCHamp, BrainVision Recorder software, v. 1.21). Digitized EEG electrode locations on the scalp were co-registered to individual MRI scans using Nexstim Brainsight TMS Frameless Navigation system (Rogue Research Inc., Montreal, Canada).   EEG data were pre-processed offline using custom scripts and EEGLab v2019.0 59  in MATLAB R2019a (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA). Data were segmented into 3000 ms epochs, each starting 1000 ms before (pre-stimulus) and ending 2000 ms (post-stimulus) following TMS pulse, respectively. Baseline correction was performed by subtracting the mean pre-stimulus (− 900 to − 100) signal amplitude from the rest of the epoch in each channel. Following baseline correction, data were visually inspected to identify and remove extremely noisy channels with high amplitudes. The median number of channels removed in the younger cohort was 2 channels (range: 0–6), and in the SAGES cohort was 1 channel (range: 0–4). Zero-padding between − 2 and 14 ms time range were then applied to remove the early TMS pulse artifact from the EEG data. Both cohorts were affected by muscle artifacts from the TMS, so we applied a standard zero-padding approach to equate analysis between the two datasets, and subsequently employed conventional ICA methods to identify and remove muscle artifacts. All zero padded epochs were then tagged based on voltage (≥ 100 μV), kurtosis (≥ 3), and joint probability (single channel-based threshold ≥ 3.5sd; all channel-based threshold ≥ 5sd) metrics to identify excessively noisy epochs. Visual inspection was performed on the tagged epochs for the final decision on removal of noisy epochs.   An initial round of fast independent component analysis (fICA) 60  was performed to identify and remove exclusively components with early TMS evoked high amplitude electrode and EMG artifacts 52 , 61 . After the first round of fICA, the EEG data were interpolated for previously zero-padded time window around TMS pulse (− 2 ms to 14 ms) using linear interpolation, band pass filtered using a forward–backward 4th order Butterworth filter from 1 to 100 Hz, notch filtered between 57 and 63 Hz, and referenced to global average. Missing/removed channels were interpolated using spherical interpolation, and DLPFC, IPL and sham stimulation blocks were merged, in that order. Because recordings were made with 60/64 channels, and the signals were unlikely to have that many independent sources, PCA was used to reduce dimensionality prior to ICA. This approach can improve decomposition 62 , 63  and signal to noise ratio of large sources 64 . Data were reduced into no fewer than 30 dimensions in the younger cohort (median = 32.5, range = 30–50), and no fewer than 35 dimensions in the older cohort (median = 45, range = 35–60), optimized at the individual level to maximize uniqueness and dipolarity of resulting components while minimizing residual noise components 64 . A second round of fICA was run on the merged data to manually remove all remaining artifact components 61  including eye movement/blink, muscle noise (EMG), single electrode noise, TMS evoked muscle, and cardiac beats (EKG). The median number of components removed in the younger cohort was 21.5 (range: 18–41), and in the older cohort was 38.5 (range: 28–55). The data were low pass filtered with a 4th order Butterworth filter at 50 Hz.   Components that met the following criteria were classified as AEP components and removed: (1) the time-course has three peaks, P50-N100-P200, with the lowest amplitude in the P50 compared with N100 and P200; (2) the scalp topography reflects left/right symmetry and a central distribution anterior to Cz; and (3) the component is shared across both active stimulation sites and sham stimulation. The median number of remaining components after all cleaning steps in the younger cohort was 8.5 (range: 6–11), and in the older cohort was 7 (range 4–16). See “ Discussion ” for more details about AEP classification criteria. Conditions were then unmerged for subsequent analyses.   In both rounds of fICA, a semi-automated artifact detection algorithm incorporated into the open source TMS-EEG Signal Analyzer (TESA v1.1.0-beta) extension for EEGLAB was used to classify and visually inspect components based on their frequency, activity power spectrum, amplitude, scalp topography, and time course 65  ( http://nigelrogasch.github.io/TESA/ ). Analysis of TMS-evoked potentials   All analyses were performed at the single subject level, and group level statistical analyses were performed. Selections of both individual and group data are shown in several figures and  supplementary figures . The specific analyses are described here, of time course and topography of TEPs, GMFP and LMFP, TEP similarity, source reconstruction, and follow-up exploratory analyses of remaining TEP.   Time-course and topography   Latency and amplitude of peaks in the pre- and post-AEP removal TMS-evoked cortical response were identified using an automated  peakfinder  algorithm 66  and scalp topographies were plotted at those peak latencies. GMFP/LMFP (and windows)   Global mean field power (GMFP) across all channels was used to quantify global synchrony and excitability 67 , 68  in the 14–400 ms post-TMS window. We computed Global Mean Field Power (GMFP) following:   G M F P t = ∑ i k ( V i ( t ) - V m e a n ( t ) ) 2 K    where V i (t) is the voltage at electrode  i  at a certain point in time, V mean(t)  is the mean of instantaneous TEP across electrodes, and  K  is the number of electrodes.   Local mean field potentials (LMFP) from electrodes near the active stimulation sites were used to quantify local activity under the coil 67 , 69 , 70  in the 14–400 ms post-TMS window. Channels included in each region of interest were determined as all electrodes bordering stimulation target locations. For the younger cohort, the DLPFC ROI included AF1, F7, F5, F1, FT7, FC5, and FC3 and the IPL ROI included TP7, CP5, CP3, P7, P3, and PO3. In the older cohort, the DLPFC ROI included AF3, F7, F5, F3, FT7, FC5, and FC3, and the IPL ROI included TP7, CP5, CP3, P7, P5, P3, PO7, and PO3. See Supplementary Fig.  S1  for electrode arrays color coded to show LMFP ROIs for younger adult (S1A) and older SAGES (S1B) cohorts. In addition, GMFP and LMFP were calculated for three windows corresponding to the three subcomponents of AEP. Windows were defined in each study cohort for GMFP, LMFP of the DLPFC ROI, and LMFP of the IPL ROI, using the latency of the minimum amplitude between peaks in the sham stimulation condition (determined using the  peakfinder () function, which finds peaks with amplitudes that are greater than two standard deviations above baseline 66 ). See Fig.  2 D for time-windows defined for GMFP analysis in the younger cohort, and Supplementary Fig.  S2  for all defined windows in both cohorts. Area under the curve for GMFP, LMFP at the DLPFC ROI, LMFP at the IPL ROI, and in all time-windows were entered as dependent variables into a 2 ( Version : pre-AEP removal, post-AEP removal) by 3 ( Site : DLPFC, IPL, shamM1) repeated-measures analyses of variance (ANOVA).   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Group level impact of removing AEP in the younger cohort (N = 10). Topoplots are greyscale if no peak is present at the indicated latency. ( A ) DLPFC condition TEPs pre (black) and post (blue) removal of AEP components. Scalp topography pre (above) and post (below) at indicated latencies. ( B ) IPL condition TEPs/topographies pre (black/above) and post (purple/below) removal of AEP components. ( C ) Sham stimulation condition TEPs/topographies pre (black/above) and post (green/below) removal of AEP components. ( D ) Global mean field potential (GMFP) area under the curve plots pre (darker) and post (lighter) AEP removal in three time-windows, defined by sham GMFP peak activity pre-AEP removal. Similarity index   Similarity between TEPs across site and between subjects at each site, pre and post AEP removal, was quantified in vector space using the cosine similarity index (SI) which ranges from 0 to 1 (low to high similarity, with 0.5 indicating mid-range) 13 , 23 . We first generated a TEP matrix for each subject (from averaged responses) with a fixed window size (385 ms) covering EEG responses from 14 to 400 ms. Each TEP matrix contains millisecond voltage values from all channels with a 63 × 385 matrix size. We then used cosine similarity to quantify similarity index (SI) between matrices following:   SI XY = ∑ i , t = 1 n ( X it ∗ Y it ) ( ∑ i , t = 1 n X it 2 ) ∗ ( ∑ i , t = 1 n Y it 2 )    where  SI XY  is the cosine similarity between TEP matrices x and y for a given stimulation site, and  n  is the number of channels,  X it  and  Y it  are the  i th vector of all channels at time  t . Within-subject site SI was computed as the mean SI from the diagonal of site comparison grids. Between-subject SI was computed as the mean SI of half grid, excluding the diagonal, of within-site grids (DLPFC by DLPFC, etc.). To enable assessment of similarity between the DLPFC and IPL datasets, SI was also calculated for three time-windows defined by residual TEP in active stimulation conditions post-AEP removal: early, mid, and late latency. These windows were defined using GMFP area under the curve post-AEP removal active stimulation conditions averaged across participants.   We performed multiple univariate tests to describe how the AEP-removal method affects each outcome variable separately. Multiple univariate tests are preferred over one multivariate MANOVA here for a number of reasons 71 . First, our research question dictates a model that tests for effects of the method on each outcome variable independently, with no particular interest in a linear composite of the outcome variables. Our approach best describes how using this AEP-removal method will practically influence a variety of datasets if applied. We acknowledge that redundant information is being obtained using multiple ANOVAs but suggest that this redundancy supports that removing AEP using this method has robust effects on mean field potentials across ROIs and, particularly at mid and later latencies. However, to address concerns about experiment-wise Type 1 error for performing multiple ANOVAs, we additionally use an additive Bonferroni inequality. For  m  = 12 tests, α of 0.05 becomes 0.004 (0.05/12). EEG source reconstruction   All TMS evoked EEG source reconstruction was performed using Brainstorm 72 . First, digitized EEG channel locations and anatomical landmarks of each subject were extracted from Brainsight (nasion ‘NAS’, left pre-auricular ‘LPA’, and right pre-auricular ‘RPA’ points; Rogue Research Inc., Montreal, Canada), and registered onto individual MRI scans in brainstorm. Next, the EEG epochs, − 500 ms to 1000 ms with respect to TMS pulse for each TMS trial were uploaded, and the average epoch time series was generated for each subject. Forward modeling of neuro electric fields was performed using the open MEEG symmetric boundary element method, all with default parameter settings. Noise covariance was estimated from individual trials using the pre-TMS (− 500 to − 1 ms) time window as baseline. The inverse modeling of the cortical sources was performed using the minimum norm estimation (MNE) method with dynamic statistical parametric mapping (dSPM) and constraining source dipoles to the cortical surface. The resulting output of EEG source reconstruction was the MNE current density time series for each cortical vertex. Residual mid-latency components   As a follow-up we examined the residual TEP in a mid-latency window. We used two approaches in an attempt to isolate the mid-latency components in sham—(1) a percent variance threshold to identify components contributing the most variance in this mid-latency window, and (2) non-parametric permutation based suprathreshold cluster size analysis 73 . We looked for clusters in the post pulse GMFP that were greater than the baseline period, and we determined which components contributed the highest percent variance to each of these clusters. See “ Results ”—“ Residual mid latency components ” for more details. Due to redundancy in the results of these two approaches, only the percent variance threshold approach (1) is described here. See  Supplementary material  for the results of the non-parametric permutation-based cluster size analysis (2).   All plots were generated using custom scripts and MATLAB R2019a (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA), and figures were designed using Inkscape (version 1.1,  http://www.inkscape.org/ ). Results   Results of all analyses are shown for the younger cohort in Figs.  1 ,  2 ,  3 , 4 ,  5 , and summarized results are shown for the older cohort in Fig.  6 . See Supplementary for additional Tables and Figures for both cohorts.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Auditory evoked potential (AEP) in the younger adult cohort. ( A ) Time-course and topography of AEP component removed from merged dataset in a representative participant. ( B ) ERP Image of AEP component in merged dataset across all trials in the same representative participant. Conditions were merged in this order: DLPFC, IPL, sham. ( C ) Components removed, averaged across all participants (N = 10; after being unmerged into conditions), and components removed from sham without merging with other conditions, averaged across all participants (N = 10). Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Specificity of TEPs (cosine similarity) before and after removing AEPs in the younger cohort. ( A ) Between-subject similarity index grids pre- and post-removal of AEP components. ( B ) Between-subject similarity index average (calculated from half of the grid, excluding the diagonal) pre- and post-remov