>Methods   Participants   Twelve healthy participants (3 female) aged  24.2 ± 1.7  years (range 22–28 years) participated in the experiment. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Two male participants were left-handed and all other participants were right-handed. All participants were students at the University of Münster, Germany, in the faculty of Psychology & Sport Sciences. Materials   Motion tracking   A passive marker-based optical motion capture system (Vicon Motion Systems Ltd, Oxford, UK) with 10 cameras was used to record the participants’ motions and the motion of a test object at a sampling frequency of 100 Hz. Seventeen spherical reflective markers with a diameter of 6.4 mm were attached to the participant’s upper body (head, trunk, shoulders, right arm; see Fig.  1 ). The marker set was based on the Plug-in Gait model [ 24 ]. The following upper body angles were extracted (with Nexus [ 24 ]) for the right arm: between the upper body and upper arm (flexion/extension, abduction/adduction, internal/external rotation), the upper arm and forearm (flexion/extension), the forearm and hand (flexion/extension, ulnar/radial deviation), and the hand rotation along the longitudinal axis of the forearm (identified by the Plug-in Gait as wrist rotation).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Marker setup. Positions of the 17 reflective markers (based on the Plug-in Gait model, Vicon, 2022) Test object   A self-constructed, 3D-printed test object was used to assess upper body movements during a replacement task. This test object included four force transducers for the measurement of grip forces (not used for this study) and five infrared LEDs (embedded in the base) which allowed the object’s motion to be tracked in the Vicon system. Two different size test objects were used. Both objects had an identical base ( 8 cm × 8 cm × 8 cm ) housing the LEDs and in which a weight (502 g) could be attached inside the object without changing the exterior appearance. The grasping surfaces of the two objects differed in size and distance from each other ( 5 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm ;  8 cm × 8 cm × 8 cm ) and were arranged one on top of the other on top of the base (see Fig.  2 ). Only the upper (yellow) grasping surfaces were used for this study. The small object weighed 341 g in the light condition (without attached weight) and 843 g in the heavy condition (with attached weight). The large object weighed 372 g in the light condition (without attached weight) and 874 g in the heavy condition (with attached weight). In order to provide more variance in the kinematics (besides the starting position of the object), which is independent of the object weight class, half of the participants performed the pick-up and replacement task with the small object size, and the other half with the large object size.   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Test objects. Small (left) and large (right) object with a base of  8 cm × 8 cm × 8 cm  and grasping surfaces of  5 cm × 5 cm × 5 cm  or  8 cm × 8 cm × 8 cm , respectively. A weight of 502 g can be embedded in the base body Task and procedures   We designed a pick-up and replacement task, in which the participant grasped an object in a defined start position and placed it in a specific end position. Two objects, different in size and weight, were used to capture the upper body kinematics in relation to the object’s weight class. Markers were attached to the participants’ trunk and upper arm according to the Plug-in Gait marker set (see Fig.  1 ). Participants were seated at a table on a height-adjustable stool. The stool was adjusted so that the elbow was bent at  90 ∘  when the forearm was placed on the table and the palm of the hand rested flat on the table. Participants were asked to take this position at the beginning and end of each trial. Before commencing the experimental trial, the setup was calibrated to the participant’s specific model by taking a static measurement in the rest position followed by a dynamic measurement that involved the participant moving all the joints in their arm.   Four different object starting positions (near/elevated, near/on the table, far/elevated, far/on the table) were used to ensure some variance in the arm movements. The start position of the object was varied in height (3 cm or 18 cm above the table surface, see Fig.  3 ) and distance (see Fig.  4 ). The target position where the object was to be placed remained fixed, a  20.5 cm × 17 cm  area marked with tape and centered in front of the participant (see Fig.  3 ). Four blocks of 20 trials were performed ( M = 80 ), so that each set of conditions was repeated 10 times (4 start positions  ×  2 weight classes) in pseudo-randomized order across the trials. The Vicon cameras were recalibrated before each block, which required the participant to stand up and leave the recording field. Accordingly, participants had approximately 5 min during each inter-block interval in which they could stand and move freely around the room.   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Experimental setup with both object sizes. Left: small object, near, elevated. Right: large object, far, on the table. The object was placed in one of the starting positions marked by the white rectangles on the right-hand side. The rectangle immediately in front of the participant marked the end position of the object Fig. 4.     Open in a new tab   Task setup. Position of the start (S) and end (E) locations At the start of a trial, the participant sat in the start position, the Vicon measurement was initiated and the object was on a foam pad placed in the object start position. The object was then switched on (so that the infrared LEDs could be tracked) and the experimenter said “okay” signaling to the participant that they could start the pick-up and replacement task. The participant then moved their right hand to the object, grasped it by the upper grasping surface and placed the object in the target position on the table. Participants were free to choose the grasp type and the number of fingers with which they grasped the object, with the only restriction being that they only touched the yellow surfaces of the object. The participant then moved back to the start/end position and the experimenter stopped the Vicon measurement. In total, each session lasted about 2 h. Analyses   Data preprocessing   The recorded data consisted of time series for the object velocity or the measured upper body angles, i.e.,   α i  for  i = 1 , … , N . For studying the velocity profiles of the object, we calculated the velocity of a point in the middle of the object, to be able to neglect the rotation of the object in z-direction. In order to compare the time series, they were each cut to their start and end point. The start point was taken as the first time stamp in which increase in the object’s height was detected. We then tested ending the time series with two different approaches: The first approach was to study the time series at the beginning of the lifting process and to use the first  T  measured points. Hence, we modeled each time series using the functions     α i ( t ) , t ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] , i = 1 , … N ,   1     which we sampled at the discrete time points   0 , t 2 - t 1 t T - t 1 , t 3 - t 1 t T - t 1 , … , t T - 1 - t 1 t T - t 1 , 1 .   For comparison, we used a second approach where we cut the time series to the time  t e  when the objects’ height reached its final position as determined by the measurement of the objects’ height. This resulted in time series of different lengths for each trial. The mean length was 163 time stamps, i.e., 1630 ms, the minimum and maximum trial lengths were 1090 ms and 2260 ms, respectively. The different trial lengths were normalized to 1, where we used for every trial instead of the given time stamps  t 1 , ⋯ , t e  the normalized time stamps.   Any missing data were interpolated linearly. An example based on the upper body angle time series,  α i ( t ) , of one participant’s trials, using the first  T = 100  data points is plotted in Fig.  5 .   Fig. 5.     Open in a new tab   Exemplary time series data. Solid: data  α i ( t )  of one person for three of the seven angles. Black, dashed: Approximated time series  α ~ i ( t )  with  n = 8 . The colors belong to the heavy (red) and light (blue) object. We show the case  T = 100 , i.e., using the first second of the time series. For every angle we show three trials for the heavy and the light object, respectively Prediction procedure   The aim was to extract the information from the time series,  α i ( t ) , which classifies the object’s weight. We either used the three velocity directions of the object, which means  N  = 3 or all the angles of the right arm, which gave a total of  N  = 7 angles. There were several reasons why it was not feasible to use the raw measured time series for classification. First and foremost, the measurements were noisy and had to be smoothed. Using all, approximately  163 · 3 = 489  or  163 · 7 = 1141 , data points for each trial would have provided far too many features given information was collected for 960 trials. Furthermore, at specific times, the angles were not robust against changes in absolute position and the same movement from a slightly different starting position could result in completely different angles.   Therefore, we performed the following feature extraction: each time series,  α i ( t ) , can be viewed as a smooth function defined on [0, 1], which facilitates the decomposition in basis functions. The half-period cosine basis is particularly useful in this case as it allows for every angle,  i , to approximate the corresponding time series well by     α i ( t ) ≈ ∑ k = 0 n - 1 a k ( i ) cos ( π k t ) = : α ~ i ( t ) , i = 1 , … N .   2     The half-period cosine basis is a good choice for the approximation of non-periodic functions, as in this case, the decay rate is  O ( n 3 / 2 )  and the coefficients  a k ( i )  can be calculated easily and quickly at specific points in each time series using the discrete cosine transform [ 25 , Chapter 6]. Therefore, we described the time series  α i ( t )  using  n = 8  parameters  a k ( i ) ,  k = 0 , … , n - 1  which is, in contrast to the full time series, a very compressed expression. Another advantage of this procedure is that the sum of cosine functions smooths out any inaccuracies in the measurements that caused noisy data in the original time series. In Fig.  5 , we used dashed lines to plot the approximate times series  α ~ i ( t )  for  n = 8  in addition to the measured time series  α i ( t )  for the upper body angles approach. As seen in Fig.  5 , the 8 parameters per time series appropriately captured the behavior of the functions, while fewer parameters would cause bigger discrepancies between the measured and approximated times series. For that reason, we worked with  n = 8  in the following analysis. Similar choices of  n  did not affect the results significantly.   Overall, for  M = 80 · 12 = 960  trials, we had  n = 8  parameters for each of the N time series. This can be considered as data compression. In other words, we received a matrix  X ∈ R ( n N ) × M  containing the parameters  a k ( i )  for every trial. Furthermore, we had the label vector  y ∈ { - 1 , 1 } M , which assigns  - 1  to a trial with low weight and 1 to a trial with high weight.   For the classification, we used Julia’s SVM, which is contained in LIBSVM [ 26 ] in the machine learning package. Different strategies for a train/test split and CV were used to evaluate how good our classification was. First, when performing the CV for  all trials , we split all trials randomly 80/20 in training and test data sets. In a second analysis (CV  person-wise ) we used the trials from 2 participants as the test set and the trials from all other participants as the training set. In general, we standardized the values in  X  in the training trials using a Z-transformation that transformed the mean and the variance of every column of  X  to zero and one, respectively. It was necessary to do this because the parameters  a k ( i )  were scaled differently. In the prediction of the trials in the test set we had to transform the values in  X  belonging to the test trials by the same transformation like the training set. Results   The parameters  a k ( i )  cluster by person as shown in Fig.  6 . It can also be observed (especially in Fig.  6 a) that the parameters cluster with respect to the object’s start position (near vs. far). Thus, the individual and the starting position both significantly affect the parameters. Hence, in order to predict the object weight class, which is depicted in Fig.  6  by the shape of the markers, it is necessary to identify differences in the parameters  a k ( i )  for the two different weights. Therefore, as described in Sect.  2.3 , an SVM as a machine learning approach was used for classification.   Fig. 6.     Open in a new tab   Parameter distribution. The parameters  a k ( i )