>Materials and Methods   Participants   Fifty-eight participants (29 males, 29 females, age 20–30, mean = 25.17,  SD  = ± 8.4) took part in the experiment. All had normal or correct-to-normal visual acuity and all without any history of neurological disease or injury. None of them reported a history of psychiatric, neurological, or other serious diseases, which might have affected the experimental results. Before the experiment, the experimental procedure was fully explained to each participant, and all participants signed written consent forms. The experiment was conducted with approval from the Academy of Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University. Apparatus   EEG was recorded at 2000 Hz using Neuroscan’s Scan 4.5 system with 64 electrodes (FPZ, FP1,2, AF3,4, FZ, F1-8, FCZ, FC1-6, FT7,8, CZ, C1-6, T7,8, CPZ, CP1-6, TP7,8, PZ, P1-8, POZ, PO1-8, OZ, O1,2, CB1,2), and the EEG equipment was set a 50 Hz notch filter to eliminate the power line interference during acquisition. The electrode position was placed in accordance with the international standard 10–20 electrode system. All the electrodes were referenced to the right mastoid, using a forehead ground, as shown in  Figure 1 . The impedance of every electrode was kept below 5 kΩ. The RSVP character flashing stimulus interface was written by using the Psychtoolbox software. Stimuli were presented on a 24″ TFT screen with a refresh rate of 120 Hz and a resolution of 1920 × 1280 p × 2. Data analysis and classification were performed with MATLAB and Python. Furthermore, data preprocessing used EEGLAB in the MATLAB environment.   FIGURE 1.     Open in a new tab   Electrode positions; 64 channels (FPZ, FP1,2, AF3,4, FZ, F1-8, FCZ, FC1-6, FT7,8, CZ, C1-6, T7,8, CPZ, CP1-6, TP7,8, PZ, P1-8, POZ, PO1-8, OZ, O1,2, CB1,2) were collected during the experiment. All the electrodes were referenced to the right mastoid using a forehead ground. Experimental Paradigm   The principle of the RSVP paradigm applied to the BCI spelling device was that all symbols were presented one by one in a random order on the screen center in front of the subjects. Previous studies had shown that different characters that presented with different colors had better inducing effects ( Farwell and Donchin, 1988 ). Different colors allowed subjects to better distinguish among characters. On the basis of using colorful letters, the randomness was changed to sequential presentation in order to increase the recognition ability of the subjects in this study.   Letters’ color and RGB values were shown in  Figure 2 . As can be seen, the principle of character color selection in this experiment was to improve the arousal of characters to subjects as much as possible and to consider the differences of color senses among different subjects. In order to keep the experiment fair and just possible, the main principles were as follows. First, the span of letters’ color needs to be bigger. Second, the colors of adjacent characters were not the same color system, for example, light blue and dark blue, so as not to affect the subjects’ cognition. Third, too much color for visual stimulation in the black background was not chosen, which avoided the appearance of the visual shadow to the subjects in the experiment and affected the effect of the experiment. Fourth, the character color should flicker randomly in order to show fairness to all subjects.   FIGURE 2.     Open in a new tab   The color of each letter. The diagram of the experiment is shown in  Figures 3 ,  4 ; as can be seen, different letters were used as stimulus, and the interval time was 100 ms. Participants sat in a comfortable environment and kept the distance they felt comfortable without light and other interference. First, the preparation interface appeared on the screen. When the participant was calm and remained in a calm state, “Press Space to Start” was clicked. Then there was an RSVP interface. The displayed characters were 26 English capital letters. The target letter was out of order. After it appeared, the letters were arranged in the order from A to Z. After A to Z was proposed, the next round would appear. For a target letter, there are a total of five rounds. Each block contained eight target letters. Each experiment consisted of 20 blocks. In each round, the subjects were asked to count the number of times in which the target occurred fast and quietly. Each subject was required to carry out three experiments with a time interval of 2 days. Before the first experiment, the subjects must go through certain training so that they could be familiar with the contents of the experiment and achieve better results in the next experiment. The number of training tests varied from person to person with the average of 16 rounds.   FIGURE 3.     Open in a new tab   The image-based RSVP framework for experiment. FIGURE 4.     Open in a new tab   The RSVP paradigm in one round. In summary, each participant did three experiments, with a time interval of 2 days. Each section consisted of 20 blocks, and each block consisted of 8 trials, and each trial consisted of 5 rounds. Data Analysis   EEG Data Processing   The EEG data were re-referenced by averaging both ears and were then filtered by a low-pass filter with a 0.1–30 Hz bandpass. The data were downsampled from 2000 to 200 Hz, and each symbol was divided into epochs ranging from −200 to −800 ms for further analysis.   Therefore, the resulting matrix was 64 × 200 (64 EEG channels and 200 time samples). In the experiment, the EEG equipment was set a 50 Hz notch filter to remove the interference from power frequency noise during acquisition, and we used a 0.1–30 Hz bandpass filter to remove high-frequency noise in EEG data preprocessing, which disturbed the result greatly. In this experiment, we selected the channel data (FZ, CZ, PZ, O1, O2, OZ;  Marathe et al., 2016 ) related to visual stimuli in order to analyze. Coherence Average ERP Signals   The data that belong to each person’s EEG induced by the experimental paradigm range from −200 to −800 ms based on the set of the stimulation. We select the data of 200 ms (−200∼0 ms) as the baseline correction and then independently average all previous times of target and nontarget, respectively, so as to obviously see their grand-average ERPs. Processing Method   Coherent Average Algorithm   Coherent average algorithm is one of the most popular methods to extract weak signals in strong noise background. American scholar Dawson overlapped different EEG patterns on the same paper to obtain the initial EEG waveforms. Because the P300 signal studied in this paper is strictly time-locked, the background noise can be assumed as a random signal that is different from stimulus, so this method can be used in drawing the time domain waveform.   We think  x i ( m ) represents the pretreated EEG signals,  s ( m ) represents the P300 signals, and  n i ( m ) represents the background noise, so:     x j ( m ) = s ( m ) + n j ( m ) , j = 1 , 2 , … M   (1)     where  j  represents the trials,  M  represents the number of trials, and  m  represents the value of each sampling point. The estimated P300 signals can be obtained by averaging the preprocessed signals  M :     s ⌢ ( n ) = 1 M ∑ i = 1 M x i ( n ) = s ( n ) + 1 M ∑ i = 1 M n i ( n )   (2)     By the random characteristics of noise, the above can be ordered as  1 M ∑ i = 1 M n i ( n ) = 0 . Therefore, the superposition process can enhance the P300 signal effectively and draw an obvious and smooth P300 waveform. Angle Cosine Similarity   Angle cosine similarity is evaluated by calculating the angle cosine value of two vectors. The angle cosine similarity draws the vector into the vector space according to the coordinate value.   For a two-dimensional space, it is clear from the vector dot product formula that:     cos ⁡ θ = a • b ∥ a ∥ ∥ b ∥   (3)     Assuming the coordinates of the vector a, b are ( x 1 , y 1 ) and ( x 2 , y 2 ):     cos ⁡ θ = x 1 x 2 + y 1 y 2 x 1 2 + y 1 2 × x 2 2 + y 2 2   (4)     The value of cos⁡θ ranges from -1 to 1, and the larger the value of cos⁡θ, the smaller the angle between the vectors, which means they have more similarity. Information Transfer Rate   In addition to the usual criterion, namely the classification accuracy, the performance of the proposed system was evaluated by the information transfer rate (ITR). The ITR is an important criterion to determine the system performance in BCI studies, especially P300 speller protocols.   It shows the amount of information that can be transferred in a minute ( Krusienski et al., 2006 ) and is defined as:     I T R = log 2 ⁡ N + P log 2 ⁡ P + ( 1 - P ) log 2 ⁡ 1 - P N - 1 T   (5)     where N denotes the number of classes, P is the accuracy of classification, and T indicates the time interval that character selection is performed in minute. Linear Discriminant Analysis   As we all know, there are many classification methods for EEG signals, which are mainly divided into two types: linear classification method and nonlinear classification method. The selection problems of these two types have been controversial ( Muller et al., 2003 ). Nonlinear classifiers such as support vector machines (SVMs) ( Gehler and Schölkopf, 2002 ) can obtain higher classification accuracy than linear classifiers on some data, but the algorithm modeling process is complicated, in which it is difficult to select suitable kernel functions, and it is sensitive to the change of subjects and is not suitable for cross-subject classification studies. The linear classifier model can be learned quickly and has strong generalization ability, and the classification effect is good enough, which may be more suitable for cross-subject BCI research. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) ( Xanthopoulos et al., 2012 ) has a good application effect in the field on BCI based on P300.   Offline classification used the LDA for distinguishing target and nontarget letters. LDA is a dimensional reduction technique for monitoring learning, which means that each sample of its data set is printed. Projecting the data onto a low dimension, one expects the projection points of each category of data to be as close as possible, and the greater the distance between the classification centers of the different categories of data, the better the results. The LDA algorithm has high classification accuracy. According to the research content of this paper, the data of subjects and the cross-subject data are classified and calculated perfectly. Correlation Analysis Rank (CAR) Algorithm   The similarity of matching with the new individual refers to the similarity calculation of the ERP waveform, so there is strongest similarity with the tested individuals in the first place. The most commonly used method to measure the correlation between two variables is to calculate the Pearson correlation coefficient, which can characterize the correlation between two linear variables. The formula is as follows:     r = 1 n - 1 ∑ i = 1 n ( X i - X ¯ s X ) ( Y i - y ¯ s y )   (6)     We think  r  represents the correlation coefficient, which describes the linear correlation degree between the two variables; n stands for the sample size;  X i   Y i  represents the two variables, and represents the observed values of the two variables, respectively; and  X ¯   Y ¯  represents the mean value of the two variables, respectively.   In this study, the correlation between each subject and the other subjects was calculated and the correlation coefficient was sorted, which was used as the standard for the number of subjects in the training set. Results   ERP Analyses   ERP waveforms were drawn using a coherent average algorithm, the target ERPs of the same subject from different sessions are shown in  Figure 5A , and the averaged ERPs from different subjects are depicted in  Figure 5B . As can be seen, target ERP waveforms from one subject were more similar, in either amplitude or latency, but individual difference could be obviously observed in  Figure 5B . The large EEG differences between individuals make it more difficult to realize the high performance on cross-subject BCI system, and the similar BCI-specific characteristics between individuals make it possible to have a wide application in universal BCI.   FIGURE 5.     Open in a new tab   Target ERP waveforms  (A)  of the same subject from 20 sessions and  (B)  those from 58 different subjects. In  (A) , all lines were from one subject, and each line presented ERP waveform extracted from one session; the black lines represented the average ERP waveforms across all sessions. In  (B) , each line presented ERP waveform extracted from one subject averaged over 20 sessions, and the thick lines were the mean values across all subjects. Cosine Similarity Analysis   To evaluate the similarity of the ERP waveforms from different subjects, the cosine similarity was computed for RSVP and matrix paradigms. According to the calculation principle of cosine similarity, each subject did a correlation analysis with the rest.  Figure 6  depicted the individual similarity when the threshold was set to 0.5 for example. That is, when the angle cosine value between two subjects was larger than 0.5, the similarity value was regarded as 1; otherwise, the value was set to 0. As can be seen, the RSVP paradigm had more similarity pair than the matrix paradigm, indicating that ERPs induced by RSVP had less individual difference.   FIGURE 6.     Open in a new tab   Statistical results of angle cosine values for  (A)  matrix paradigm and  (B)  RSVP paradigm. As can be seen in  Figure 6 , the number of matches for each subject (the number of the included angle cosine values greater than 0.5) was counted; the average matching number of all subjects was 6 for the matrix paradigm, while for the RSVP paradigm, the average matching number range was 20. Especially 12 subjects had more than 20 matched numbers, 3 subjects had more than 30 matched numbers, and the best was 41 for the RSVP paradigm, which meant that the P300 signal waveform induced by the RSVP paradigm was relative to that induced by the matrix paradigm. A smaller inter-individual difference was generated and was more advantageous for cross-subject classification identification. ITR Analysis   Figure 7  displays the ITR differences between the RSVP and matrix paradigms, which were most commonly applied in the BCI community as an important metric to gauge BCI performance. As can be seen, the average information transfer rate of the RSVP paradigm was 43.18 bits/min, while the average value of the matrix paradigm was 30 bits/min. Moreover, the maximum ITR of the RSVP paradigm was 58 bits/min and the minimum was 24 bits/min, and the maximum value of the matrix paradigm was 38 bits/min and the minimum value was 17 bits/min, which proved that the RSVP paradigm was capable of producing a larger information transfer rate, because the RSVP paradigm did not require eye movement, avoiding longer cognitive periods caused by eye movements, which could have a better performance in ERP-based BCI.   FIGURE 7.     Open in a new tab   ITR results for the RSVP and matrix paradigms. CAR Analyses   The intersubject and cross-subject classification performances were computed, respectively, and the average AUC was about 0.83 for the intersubject condition. When the training and the test samples were extracted from two different subjects, the AUC value drooped to 0.51, indicating that cross-subject classification could significantly reduce the classifier performance  (p  < 0.05).   In the cross-subject classification, we tried to increase the number of subjects in the training set to reduce the impact of individual differences on the recognition results. The data from N subjects were randomly selected to form a new training set, and each subject was considered as a test set once termed as the random model. The AUC values in the random model are shown in  Figure 8 . The transverse coordinates represented the number of subjects in the training set; the longitudinal coordinates represented the AUC values on cross-subject recognition. It can be seen that with the increase in the subjects’ number in the training set, the AUC values increased and the best value was 0.6.   FIGURE 8.     Open in a new tab   The AUC results of random and order models. Then a CAR algorithm was proposed to further improve the cross-subject classification. To evaluate the effectiveness of the CAR algorithm, the AUC values were computed accordingly, which are shown in  Figure 8 . It is obvious that for all N’s in transverse coordinates, the performance of the CAR algorithm was significantly better than that of the order model. Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to test the normal distribution of the data. The results showed that the data are in accord with the normal distribution and complied with the  t -test requirements. So paired  t -test was used for statistical analysis, and whatever the value of N was, the CAR algorithm could si