>Methods   A spectrum is defined as a set of (mass, intensity) pairs called peaks which are assigned into uniformly sized mass bins (e.g. 1 Th bins 8 ). After transformation  †  a spectrum becomes a vector  S  with  n  bins, where each bin  S i  contains the summed intensity of all peaks with masses in that bin; all subsequent references to “spectrum” refer to the respective spectrum’s vector. Given a library spectrum  L  and a query spectrum  S , the projection spectrum  Pro j ( S, L ) is defined as:     Proj ( S , L ) = { S i : ( L i > 0 ) , 0 otherwise }   All library spectra  L  are normalized to euclidean norm || L ||= 1.0, as are all projected spectra:     S L = NormProj ( S , L ) = { Proj ( S , L ) i ‖ Proj ( S , L ) ‖ } , where ‖ Proj ( S , L ) ‖ = ∑ i Proj ( S , L ) i 2   The most common spectral similarity function used for spectral matching is cosine (also known as normalized dot product), defined as follows for vectors of Euclidian norm 1.0:     cos ( L , S L ) = ∑ i L i × S i L   We define a replicate spectrum  R  (relative to a library spectrum  L ) to be a spectrum of the same molecule as  L  and acquired under the same or similar experimental conditions (i.e., charge state, instrument, collision energy, abundance, etc.). Due to stochastic factors in mass spectrometry fragmentation and instrument measurement error, 17  some level of variation is expected between the intensities of peaks in  R  relative to the intensities of peaks in  L . We model this variability with a log ratio of ion intensities,   log ( R i L / L i )  where  R L  =  NormPro j ( R, L ); this ratio is calculated across all bins in  R  and  L  where  L i  is not zero.   For all library spectra with replicate spectra in our training datasets, all observed log ratios were collected into an ion variation histogram. We use this histogram (scaled to total area under the curve 1.0) as the empirical probability mass function,  RatioFreq ( r ), of variation in ion intensities for all  L i  ≠ 0 ( Figure 1A ). In difference from varying intensities, the special cases of ion deletion (i.e.,   R i L = 0 ) are modeled separately with   DelFreq = # Deletions ∑ L ∈ Library # Peak s L × # Replicates L , where #Deletions is the total number of peak deletions in all replicate spectra, # Replicates L  is the number of replicate spectra in our training set of a Library spectrum  L , and # Peaks L  is the number of peaks in a given library spectrum  L . Combining our model of ion variance,  RatioFreq ( r ), and our model for ion deletion events  DelFreq , the probability  Prob ( R i | L i ) of observing a replicate ion intensity  R i  given a library ion intensity  L i  is:     Prob ( R i ∣ L i ) = { DelFreq if R i = 0 ( 1 - DelFreq ) × RatioFreq ( log 2 ( R i L i ) ) if R i ≠ 0   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Spectral Library Generating Function (SLGF) calculation of Spectrum-Spectrum Match (SSM) significance by modeling instrument variation in peak intensity measurements in replicate spectra of the same compound. In (A) the empirical distribution of variations in intensity measurements is assessed and discretized. (B) Every possible replicate spectrum  R  is represented by a path through each library peak’s possible intensity variations, thus representing every possible combination of variations of peaks in library spectrum  L . Note that some replicate spectra (paths) are invalid, i.e. replicate spectra that do not have Euclidean norm 1; intermediate paths with norm < 1.0 are allowed during the calculation but paths resulting in euclidean norm ≠ 1.0 must be discarded when calculating the distribution of cosine scores. Our goal is to calculate the distribution of cosines scores over all possible replicate spectra within instrument variability of a given library spectrum. To compute the generating function for each library spectrum, we use  RatioFreq  and  DelFreq . We consider every possible replicate spectrum  R  ( Figure 1B ) by exploring all possible intensity variations of every peak  L i  to  R i  and calculate their aggregate probability and cosine similarity  cos ( R L , L ).   A three dimensional dynamic programming table,  LibDP ( i, c, p ), is used to explore all possible ion variations, where  i  is the spectrum vector index,  c  is the cosine score, and  p  is the intermediate euclidean norm value. The value in each cell  LibDP ( i, c, p ) is the probability of a replicate spectrum obtaining cosine  c , having  p  euclidean norm, and up to and including ion index  i . The recurrence for  LibDP ( i, c, p ) is thus defined as follows for  i  = 1 ..n :     LibDP ( i , c , p ) = ∑ y = 0 → p LibDP ( i - 1 , c - y × L i , p - y ) × Prob ( y ∣ L i )   At ( i  = 0), before considering any ions from the library spectrum  L , every cell  LibDP (0,> 0,> 0) = 0, and when no intensity is used and the cosine score is zero, it is  LibDP (0,0,0) = 1. (See  Supplementary Figure S1  for an illustration of the recursion).   Since each step  i  only depends on the values from step  i  − 1, one only needs to use two two-dimensional matrices of constant size to calculate all  LibDP  values. The size of each 2D matrix is  n c  × n p , where  n c  is the number of cosine bins and  n p  is the number of intensity bins, each set accordingly to the desired granularity. The time complexity of computing the entire dynamic programming table is   O ( n c × n p 2 × n ) . The final SLGF distribution of cosines between a library spectrum and its replicates is extracted from  LibDP ( n, *,1) and normalized to sum to 1. It is necessary to normalize at the end because of probability mass in discarded replicate spectra of Euclidean norm ≠ 1.   The probability that a replicate spectrum  R  and corresponding library spectrum  L  exhibit a cosine less than a threshold is expressed as the following p-value:     Prob L ( cos ( L , R L ) < T )    where  T  can be set according to observed cosines between query and library spectra to determine the probability of a query spectrum  S  being a replicate spectrum of  L .   We developed a spectral library search tool called Tremolo in order to assess SLGF’s utility in library search. Since SLGF assesses the quality of a single SSM but does not correct for multiple hypothesis testing when searching many spectra in a dataset, in Tremolo, FDR is estimated by the TDA. 14  In brief, decoy spectral libraries were generated using the peptide shuffle and reposition method to obtain a set of decoy spectra. For all Target and Decoy library spectra, SLGF distributions were calculated and used in the subsequent scoring function.   The scoring function of an SSM in the spectral library search between a library spectrum  L  identified as  Peptide ( L ) and a query  S  is:     SSM score = SLGF e = Prob L ( cos ( L , R L ) < cos ( L , S L ) ) × ExplainedIntensity ( S , Peptide ( L ) )    where we define  S e|Peptide ( L )  to be the subset of peaks from  S  which are annotated by peptide of  L  and   ExplainedIntensity ( S , Peptide ( L ) ) = ∑ i ( S i e ∣ Peptide ( L ) ) ∑ i ( S i )   The score  SLGF e  is also considered in addition to  SLGF  =  Prob L ( cos ( L, RL ) <  cos ( L, SL )) because it is a closer comparison to SpectraST, 9  which does not consider co-eluting peptides. In cases of co-eluting peptides,  SLGF  is able to consider these spectra because it only uses peaks at m/z values  L i  ≠ 0. Yet since SpectraST penalizes for co-elution,  SLGF e  is similarity penalized by the explained intensity term, and thus  SLGF e  is used as the scoring function in Tremolo. While  SLGF  may be useful towards identification of co-eluting peptides, additional considerations are required to correctly address co-eluting peptide identification 10  (e.g., addressing multiple molecules per spectrum and FDR on mixture identifications). Datasets   The  Training dataset  was composed of 236 CPTAC 18 , 19  Study 6 Orbitrap files (2,766,504 spectra) and was used to train the distributions of variation in ion intensities. All spectra were searched with SpectraST v4.0 with a 2 Th m/z tolerance against the NIST Yeast Ion Trap peptide library (May 2011 build). The decoy spectral library was created using SpectraST’s own decoy generation feature and the resulting SSMs were filtered to 1% FDR, yielding 396,526 identified spectra from 18,440 unique precursors. Replicate spectra in this filtered dataset were matched with their respective library spectra in the library and ion variance distributions were calculated from these replicates and library spectra.   Yeast and Human Ion Trap peptide spectral libraries, containing 78,825 and 310,688 spectra repectively, were acquired from NIST (May 2011 Build) and were used in evaluating spectral library search performance. The shuffle and reposition method proposed by Lam et al 14  was used to create the decoy spectral libraries for use in Tremolo’s, SpectraST’s, and Pepitome’s search. SpectraST, Pepitome, and Tremolo searched the NIST library using a 2 Th precursor tolerance; Tremolo and Pepitome used a 0.5 Th tolerance to annotate MS/MS peaks.   The  Yeast Test dataset  from CPTAC was composed of an arbitrarily selected file from CPTAC Study 6 that was  not  included in the Training dataset and contained 9,809 MS/MS spectra used for evaluating SLGF’s search of the NIST Yeast Ion Trap peptide library. A second test dataset,  Hela S3 Test  dataset, was also used to evaluate spectral search performance in addition to the CPTAC  Yeast Test dataset  described above. This dataset  20  was generated from human HeLa S3 cells, by tryptic digestion, and MS acquisition was performed by an LTQ Orbitrap Classic yielding high accuracy MS1 and low mass accuracy MS2 spectra.  Hela S3 Test  contained 11,723 MS/MS spectra and was searched against the NIST Human Ion Trap peptide library.   For Tremolo peptide spectra library search we find that it is best to perform library preprocessing. Peaks in library spectra were annotated with the respective peptide sequence considering  b ,  y ,  b ++,  y ++ ions, 21  their respective single  13 C  isotope peaks (+1 Da mass shift), single H 2 O losses (−18 Da mass shift), single NH 3  (−17 Da mass shift) losses and  a  ions; all non-annotated peaks and precursor peaks were removed. Additionally, all peak intensities were transformed by square root in both library and query spectra. Results and Discussion   SLGF distribution Evaluation   In calculating the SLGF distributions for each peptide library spectrum, it was observed that it was more accurate to have 10 different distributions of variation in ion intensity based on the relative intensity of an ion peak in the library spectrum (instead of a single distribution for all ion peaks).  Figure 2  illustrates the significant differences in the distributions of log-ratio ion variations for the top 10% most intense peaks and bottom 10% least intense ion peaks (other deciles also shown). Additionally, the ion variance is also substantially different between replicate spectra from high (≥ 12,000 ions) and low total ion current (< 12,000 ions) precursors. The total ion current (TIC) of a spectrum is calculated as the total ion current of that MS/MS spectrum. As expected, low intensity replicates exhibit more variation in ion intensities (i.e., wider ion variation distributions) than high intensity replicates. Using these two separate models for high and low TIC precursors, two SLGF distributions are pre-calculated for each library spectrum. Low and high TIC query spectra are then partitioned and searched separately, with SLGF p-values calculated from the corresponding SLGF distribution.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Distributions of variation in ion intensity for (A) high and (B) low TIC precursors. As illustrated by the differences between (A) and (B), the ion variation distributions for low TIC precursors tend to be wider than those of the high TIC precursors. In both cases it is shown in bold blue, the distribution of variation in ion intensities for the 10% most intense peaks in library spectra and in bold red, the distribution of variation in ion intensities for the 10% least intense peaks in library spectra, with other deciles shown in between. Note that the width of the distributions for the top decile distribution is markedly narrower than the bottom decile distribution suggesting the need to model the variation of ion intensity differently depending upon a peak’s intensity in the library spectrum. It should also be noted that the lowest decile distribution shown in (B) in red is not centered at 0 log fold variation due to the significantly higher deletion percentage (C) of the lowest decile library peaks in low TIC precursors. The deletion of these peaks caused all other peaks in the spectrum to increase in normalized intensity, for the entire spectrum is normalized to Euclidean Norm 1, thus causing a shift in the specific ion variation distribution. The SLGF distributions were visually assessed by comparing against empirical score distributions using replicates from the Training dataset, and it was found that SLGF distributions approximated the empirical distributions (See  Figure 3 ), but further work is necessary to enable a more accurate p-value calculation. Thus, we use SLGF p-value as a score and evaluate its performance in the context of spectral library search.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Empirical vs calculated (SLGF) distributions of cosines between library and replicate spectra. Empirical cosine distributions are histograms of cosine scores between a library spectrum and replicate experimental spectra ( cos ( L, R L ) for all available  R L ). Examples were selected from NIST Yeast library spectra with sufficient replicates from the  Training dataset  to derive an empirical distribution. The probability mass in the empirical distributions to the left of the theoretical SLGF distribution is mostly caused by cases of co-elution, leading to lower cosines. The discrepancies of higher cosines result from SLGF using an average model of ion variation derived from data acquired in many experiments and laboratories. As such, our average model of ion intensity variation for certain peptides has variance higher than that of the best calibrated instruments, thus causing SLGF distributions to expect lower average cosines than some empirical distributions. Peptide Spectral Library Search   To systematically assess the performance of Tremolo as a search tool, we compared it against SpectraST and Pepitome at fixed FDR. SpectraST’s performance exceeded that of Pepitome, and thus we focus our detailed analysis on the comparison with SpectraST results. Comparing the sensitivity of Tremolo to that of SpectraST on the  Yeast Test dataset  we find that at 1% spectrum-level FDR (as determined by TDA), Tremolo was able to identify 4,373 spectra versus 3,884 spectra by SpectraST (12.5% more, see  Figure 4 ).   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Peptide spectral library search sensitivity and specificity comparison between Tremolo, SpectraST, and Pepitome. In (A) the performance of the scoring function  SLGF  is shown to be comparable to that of  SLGF e , where one explicitly attempts to not consider mixture spectra (see textb for details). This contrasts to the performance of SpectraST in blue, and Pepitome in orange. (B) Number of spectra identified exclusively by SpectraST, Tremolo, and by both tools at 1% spectrum level FDR. On this Test dataset,  SLGF e  was also found to be more sensitive than SpectraST across the whole range of FDR thresholds (> 12% increase in IDs at 1% FDR). (C) Number of peptide IDs at 1% FDR by SpectraST and Tremolo. Tremolo identified 16% more peptides than SpectraST. The gain in Tremolo sensitivity can be explained by analyzing the different components in SpectraST’s SSM scores. SpectraST’s score is  SSM spectrastscore  = 0.6 D  + 0.4 DeltaD  −  b , where  D  is the cosine score between library and query.   DeltaD = D 1 - D 2 D 1  where  D 1  and  D 2  are the top and second cosine scores respectively from a set of library spectra to a query spectrum. It is argued that the larger this  DeltaD  term, the more the top candidate stands out from the alternatives, thus implying a greater chance the top candidate is correct.  b  is the penalty applied to the score for  DotBias  scores that are not preferable.  DotBias  is defined as   DotBias = ∑ i = 1 → n L i 2 ∗ ( S i L ) 2 D  and intuitively can be thought of a measure of how much a cosine score is dominated by a few peaks. A score of  DotBias  = 1.0 signifies one peak dominates the score and a score of  DotBias  ≈ 0.0, the cosine contribution is evenly distributed over all peaks. Thus, high  DotBias  scores possibly imply dubious matches as there are only a few peaks leading to a high cosine score. Low  DotBias  scores also are not preferable as this means many equal intensity peaks are matching, which most likely would imply noise. SpectraST’s penalty  b  is tuned to cause larger penalties for larger and very small  DotBias  values. In  figure 5A  it is shown the  Delt