>Methods   Listeners   Participants included 10 adults and 40 children with normal hearing sensitivity, defined as pure-tone thresholds equal to or better than 20 dB HL at octave frequencies between 250 and 8000 Hz ( American National Standards Institute, 2010 ). Adults ranged in age from 19.8 to 32.7 years ( M  = 23.5 years). Children ranged in age from 5.2 to 15.1 years ( M  = 8.7 years). Child ages were approximately uniformly distributed on the logarithm of age, with fewer older than younger children due to the expectation of decelerating maturation. One child (9.6 years) was enrolled in the study and later excluded due to strong evidence of flagging attention; thresholds in one condition progressively rose (worsened) by a factor of 10 across replicate threshold estimates. Four children (5.8, 6.8, 7.4, and 15.1 years) had previously participated in the gap detection study of  Buss et al. (2014) . For these children, a minimum of 4 months elapsed between data collection for the two experiments. Stimuli   The stimuli used to investigate possible effects of center frequency on gap detection were low-fluctuation 25-Hz-wide bands of noise centered at either 500 or 5000 Hz. For these narrowband stimuli, the ramps used to introduce temporal gaps were 40-ms raised cosines. As in  Buss et al. (2014) , low-fluctuation noise was generated using an iterative process. Beginning with a band of Gaussian noise, the time waveform was divided by its Hilbert envelope, transformed into the frequency domain, restricted to its original bandwidth, and transformed into the time domain. This process was repeated eight times. An example of the resulting stimulus envelope is illustrated in  Buss et al. (2014 ,  Figure 1 ). The potential impact of ramp duration on gap detection for wideband stimuli was investigated by using 4500-Hz-wide Gaussian noise (500–5000 Hz), with 4-ms or 40-ms raised cosines used to introduce temporal gaps.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Gap detection thresholds are shown as a function of age for individual children (circles). The geometric mean of adult gap detection thresholds (asterisks) is shown at the right of each panel, with dotted lines indicating the 95% confidence interval around adult means. Results include low-fluctuation narrowband (nb) noise centered at 500 Hz (upper left panel) or 5000 Hz (upper right panel) and wideband (wide) noise with 40-ms ramps (lower left panel) or 4-ms ramps (lower right panel). Filled symbols indicate individual children whose mean threshold rank across conditions fell in the bottom third for their age group; this group of good performers consists of the same individuals across all four panels. All stimuli were generated with a 12207-Hz sampling rate. Noise samples were 10.7 s (2 17  points) long. These samples were played continuously at 70 dB SPL, without discontinuities apart from imposed gaps. A new sample of noise was generated prior to each threshold estimation track. Gap duration was defined as the interval between the beginning of the stimulus offset and the beginning of the subsequent onset. When the gap duration was less than the ramp duration, the offset and onset overlapped such that the stimulus amplitude in the center of the gap did not fall to zero. Procedures   Threshold estimation procedures were controlled using a custom MATLAB script, which generated noise stimuli and loaded them into a real-time processor (RP2, TDT, Alachua, FL). Stimuli were routed from the real-time processor to a headphone buffer (HB7, TDT) and presented to the listener's left ear using a circumaural headset (HD 265, Sennheiser, Wedemark, Germany). Data were collected in a double-walled sound-attenuating booth. All listeners were paid an hourly rate for participation.   Stimulus intervals were 500 ms in duration, with 500-ms interstimulus intervals. Each interval was indicated visually on a touch-sensitive computer monitor, and listeners indicated their responses by touching the screen or using a mouse. A jigsaw puzzle animation was revealed over the course of a threshold estimation track, with one piece revealed following each correct response. Progress for each track was indicated with a progress bar at the top of the screen, showing the proportion of track reversals obtained. At the completion of a track, the remaining puzzle pieces were removed, revealing a complete cartoon, which performed a 2-s animation.   Thresholds were measured by using a three-alternative forced-choice procedure that incorporated a two-down, one-up stepping rule to estimate the gap duration associated with 71% being correct. At the beginning of a track, gap duration was varied by a factor of 1.41. This step size was reduced to a factor of 1.19 following the second track reversal. The track was terminated after eight reversals, and the threshold estimate for a track was the geometric mean of the final six reversals. At least three threshold estimates were collected in each condition. A fourth was collected if the first three differed by more than a factor of 1.5. The geometric mean of all threshold estimates obtained was taken as the final estimate of threshold for each condition. Conditions were presented in random order, with all tracks for a particular condition completed before moving on to the next condition. The maximum allowable gap duration was 500 ms, but all tracks stayed below this limit. Data Analyses   Statistical analyses were performed on the logarithm of gap duration. The logarithm of age was also used in the following analyses, based on the expectation that development is more rapid for younger than older children. For some analyses, child data were divided into four groups according to age: 5.0 to 6.5 years, >6.5 to 8.5 years, >8.5 to 11.0 years, and >11.0 to 15.1 years. These divisions resulted in approximately equal-sized groups. Group thresholds were computed as the geometric means of individuals' thresholds. Data distributions were evaluated and nonparametric statistics used when indicated. In particular, Spearman rank order correlations were used to evaluate associations between threshold and child age, due to the finding of larger individual differences in younger listeners. A one-tailed significance criterion was adopted to evaluate the effects of listener age on the basis of the prior prediction of poorer performance in younger listeners. Results     Figure 1  shows gap detection thresholds for individual child listeners (circles) as a function of age. The mean adult threshold is indicated with an asterisk, and dotted lines indicate the 95% confidence interval around that mean. Results for each of the four stimulus conditions are shown in separate panels: low-fluctuation narrowband stimuli centered at 500 Hz (upper left panel) and 5000 Hz (upper right panel), and wideband stimuli with 40-ms ramps (lower left panel) and 4-ms ramps (lower right panel). In all four conditions, gap detection thresholds tend to decrease with increasing child age. Spearman correlations were computed to evaluate the association between child age and gap detection threshold. For low-fluctuation narrowband stimuli, correlations were  r   S  = −.34 ( p  = .016) and  r   S  = −.43 ( p  = .003) for 500- and 5000-Hz center frequencies, respectively. For the wideband stimuli, correlations were  r   S  = −.50 ( p  = .001) and  r   S  = −.42 ( p  = .003) for 40- and 4-ms ramps, respectively.   In addition to effects related to child age, inspection of the individual data in  Figure 1  reveals that some of the youngest children consistently performed at or near the range of adults' thresholds, whereas others performed substantially more poorly. The best performers in each age group were identified by determining the rank order of thresholds and averaging the rank across all four conditions; listeners falling in the bottom third of this distribution are indicated with symbol shading in  Figure 1 . The four listeners who had previously participated in a gap detection experiment all performed better than the 50th percentile for their respective age groups, but only one of them (6.8 years) met the criterion for best performers. As indicated in the figure, individuals who performed well in one condition were highly likely to perform well in the other conditions. For all child listeners, thresholds were highly correlated across the four conditions, with values ranging from  r   S  = .73 to  r   S  = .82 ( p  < .001). The magnitude of these correlations is high compared with correlations with child age ( r   S  = −.34 to −.50), consistent with the observation that the marked individual differences cannot be attributed entirely to listener age.   A possible explanation for poor performance in some children is variable attention to the task, which might be reflected in higher variability across track reversals. Indeed, children with higher thresholds did seem to respond less consistently. This was quantified by computing the correlation between thresholds and the standard deviation across all track reversals contributing to the final threshold estimate in each condition.   1    Evaluating just the data of child listeners, the results ranged from  r   S  = .48 ( p  = .001; low-fluctuation noise at 500 Hz) to  r   S  = .63 ( p  < .001; low-fluctuation noise at 5000 Hz). For all four conditions, the geometric standard deviation of reversals was a stronger predictor of thresholds than child age, although not significantly so ( p  ≥ 0.226 two tailed   2   ).     Figure 2  shows the geometric mean of gap detection thresholds for listeners in each age group. Symbol shape reflects the stimulus condition, as defined in the legend. As in  Figure 1 , a general improvement in thresholds with increasing age is evident. Although thresholds differed in the four conditions, the general improvement with age appears to be largely parallel. In the narrowband conditions, thresholds were a factor of ~1.6 higher at 500 Hz than 5000 Hz for all groups, and in the wideband conditions thresholds were a factor of ~1.9 higher for the 40-ms than the 4-ms ramps. Although heteroscedasticity of the data limits the options for statistical analysis of the thresholds, the variance across groups was nearly uniform when the ratio of thresholds was examined.   3    The ratio of thresholds (in milliseconds) was, therefore, evaluated by using univariate analysis of variance. For the ratio of thresholds in the 500- and 5000-Hz conditions, the effect of age group was nonsignificant,  F (4, 45) = 0.89,  p  = .480, η p   2  = .073. Likewise, for the ratio of thresholds in the 40- and 4-ms ramp conditions, the effect of age group was also nonsignificant,  F (4, 45) = 0.55,  p  = .704, η p   2  = .046. If age affected thresholds differently at different frequencies or for different ramp durations, an effect of group would be expected. The absence of an effect of group in these analyses is consistent with the idea that development is similar for the two center frequencies and for the two ramp durations. There was, however, evidence of development in both data sets for all groups of children. This was evaluated by performing a series of  t  tests with unequal variance. The geometric mean of thresholds in the 500- and 5000-Hz conditions was significantly lower for adults than any of the child age groups, including the children >11.0 to 15.1 years ( p  = .026). Likewise, the geometric mean of thresholds in the 40- and 4-ms conditions was significantly lower for adults than any child age group, including the children >11.0 to 15.1 years ( p  = .034).   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Group geometric mean gap detection thresholds are shown for five age groups: 5.0 to 6.5 years, >6.5 to 8.5 years, >8.5 to 11.0 years, >11.0 to 15.1 years, and adults. Symbol shape reflects the stimulus condition: low-fluctuation narrowband (nb) noise centered at 500 Hz (downward triangles) or 5000 Hz (upward triangles) and wideband (wide) noise with 40-ms ramps (squares) or 4-ms ramps (diamonds). One reason for the overall poorer gap detection of younger listeners could be reduced sensitivity to changes in intensity. That is, younger listeners may require a larger criterion change in level at the beginning and end of the gap. Comparing thresholds in the 4- and 40-ms ramp conditions could provide an estimate of that level criterion, assuming other aspects of the task are the same for the two ramp durations. In particular, if age effects are due solely to differing sensitivities to changes in level, and sensitivity to gap duration is constant across ramp duration conditions, then the criterion can be estimated by (a) plotting the envelopes associated with threshold duration gaps in the two conditions, with the center of each gap aligned in time, and (b) determining the level at which the two envelopes intersect. This approach is illustrated in  Figure 3 , which shows idealized stimulus envelopes associated with gaps at the group mean threshold for 5.0- to 6.5-year-olds (top panel) and adults (bottom panel). Recall that gap duration was originally defined as the interval between the beginning of the offset and subsequent onset; when the gap duration exceeds the ramp duration, this is equivalent to measuring gap duration from the 6-dB down points of the offset and onset ramps. For 5.0- to 6.5-year-olds, mean thresholds using the original definition were 10.1 ms for the 4-ms ramp condition (solid line) and 17.5 ms for the 40-ms ramp condition (dashed line). If gap durations were measured instead from the 7.8-dB down points, then the gap detection threshold would be 9.6 ms in both conditions. For adults, mean thresholds using the original definition were 4.6 ms for the 4-ms ramp condition (solid line) and 7.6 ms for the 40-ms ramp condition (dashed line). Measuring gap duration at the 3.0-dB down points on the offset and onset ramps results in a threshold of 5.8 ms in both conditions.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Idealized envelopes are shown for threshold duration gaps with either 4-ms ramps (solid lines) or 40-ms ramps (dashed lines), positioned on the abscissa such that the midpoints of each gap are aligned in time. Tick marks on the abscissa indicate 10 ms per division. The top panel shows mean gap durations for the youngest group of children (5.0 to 6.5 years), and the bottom panel shows means gap durations for adults. The level at which the envelopes cross, the criterion level change, is indicated in each panel. An analysis of individual listener's thresholds was carried out to evaluate the extent to which differences in the level-change criteria could account for the age effects illustrated in  Figures 1  and  2 . As expected, there was a trend for larger criterion level changes in younger listeners, although the association between criterion and child age failed to reach significance ( r   S  = .24,  p  = .072 one tailed). The gap duration defined by each child's criterion differed significantly as a function of child age, with younger children obtaining larger criterion-adjusted gap thresholds than older children ( r   S  = −.38,  p  = .008 one tailed). These results provide tentative support for the idea that the development of intensity discrimination may play a role in the accuracy with which the beginning and end of a gap are represented in the central auditory system, but that this factor does not fully account for the age effect observed in gap detection. The significant negative correlation between age and criterion-adjusted gap duration is evidence that there are additional factors related to the minimum duration below criterion that underlie detection of a gap. Discussion   This study was designed to evaluate the effects of stimulus frequency and ramp duration on children's gap detection thresholds. Mean thresholds improved with child age in all conditions, a trend consistent with the previous results of  Buss et al. (2014)  and  Wightman et al. (1989) , and with the 500-Hz data of  Irwin et al. (1985) . This pattern of development was not significantly different for narrowband stimuli at 500 versus 5000 Hz, or for wideband stimuli shaped with 4- versus 40-ms ramps. In all four stimulus conditions, thresholds were significantly higher for children than adults, even for the oldest age group tested (>11.0 to 15.1 years).   Effect of Stimulus Frequency on Gap Detection   In the present study, gap detection thresholds were lower for the low-fluctuation narrowband noise at 5000 Hz than 500 Hz, a difference that was approximately a factor of 1.6 for all five age groups. This result contrasts with published data on gap detection with narrowband Gaussian noise in adults ( Eddins et al., 1992 ;  Hall et al., 1996 ). For example,  Hall et al. (1996)  reported that thresholds for 20-Hz-wide bands of noise were constant for center frequencies from 250 to 8000 Hz. There are at least two plausible explanations for this discrepancy between data sets. The first has to do with the greater inherent fluctuation in Gaussian noise than in low-fluctuation noise. We know that inherent noise fluctuation can elevate gap detection thresholds in both children and adults ( Buss et al., 2014 ;  Grose et al., 2008 ). It is possible that previous data on gap detection for Gaussian noise bands at different center frequencies were limited by inherent fluctuation, obscuring an effect of frequency. This possibility is undermined somewhat by the results of  Moore, Peters, and Glasberg (1993) , who reported pure-tone gap detection as a function of frequency (100–2000 Hz). In that study, thresholds were approximately U shaped, with the lowest thresholds at 800–1000 Hz. Most relevant to the present data set, thresholds for a presentation level of 70 dB SPL were comparable at 400 and 2000 Hz. Extrapolating from these data, pure-tone gap thresholds at 5000 Hz could be higher—not lower—than those at 500 Hz.   The second factor that may play a role in the frequency effect observed with low-fluctuation narrowband noise has to do with the degree to which the stimulus retains its low-fluctuation characteristics after passing through an auditory filter. The reduced envelope fluctuation of a low-fluctuation noise depends critically on preservation of magnitude and phase characteristics. The relatively wide auditory filter at 5000 Hz may preserve these characteristics better than the narrower filter at 500 Hz.  Hall, Buss, Ozmeral, and Grose (2016)  recently provided some evidence that auditory filtering affects the internal representation of low-fluctuation noise, albeit for bandwidths wider than 25 Hz. That study also reported that adults' thresholds were consistently approximately 20 ms for 25-Hz-wide bands of low-fluctuation noise centered on 500, 1000, 2000, or 4000 Hz. One difference between the stimuli used by  Hall et al. (2016)  and those of the present study is that stimuli in the previous study were gated on during each listening interval rather than playing continuously, as in the present study. Continuous presentation has been observed to cause loudness adaptation, particularly at high stimulus frequencies ( Hellman, Miskiewicz, & Scharf, 1997 ;  Miskiewicz, Scharf, Hellman, & Meiselman, 1993 ). Although it is possible that the greater loudness adaptation at high frequencies could play a role in lower thresholds for a continuous noise at 5000 Hz than at 500 Hz, it is not clear that adaptation differs significantly between these frequency regions for a presentation level of 70 dB SPL ( Hellman et al., 1997 ;  Tang, Liu, & Zeng, 2006 ).   Whereas gap detection depended on the stimulus frequency in the present study, the pattern of thresholds as a function of listener age did not. The improvement in performance with listener age was parallel for low-fluctuation noise centered on 500 and 5000 Hz. These results contrast somewhat from those of  Irwin et al. (1985) , who reported an age effect for gap detection in octave-wide bands of Gaussian noise at 500 Hz but not at 1000 or 2000 Hz. The absence of a frequency effect for 25-Hz-wide bands in the current paradigm implicates bandwidth differences in the effects reported by  Irwin et al. (1985) . That possibility is broadly consistent with the data of  Buss et al. (2014) , with the caveat that the very narrow (25-Hz) bandwidth and the use of low-fluctuation noise represents a very different stimulus than that used by other researchers. Effect of Ramp Duration on Gap Detection   In the present study, gap detection thresholds for wideband noise were lower for 4-ms than 40-ms ramps, an effect that was approximately a factor of 1.9 for all five age groups. Recall that gap durations were defined as the delay between the initiation of marker offset at the beginning of the gap and the initiation of marker onset at the end of the gap. For gaps that are at least as long as the ramp duration, this is equivalent to measuring gap duration from the 6-dB down (half-rise) point. We know that young children are less sensitive to dynamic changes in stimulus intensity compared with older children and adults ( Buss et al., 2013 ;  Hall & Grose, 1994 ), so it is possible that younger listeners may require larger changes in level before they can detect a gap. The criterion level change required to detect a gap was estimated by assuming that thresholds for the 4- and 40-ms ramp conditions were consistent within an individual. These criterion values were modestly correlated with child age, although that association failed to reach significance. The criterion-adjusted gap thresholds, on the other hand, were significantly correlated with child age. These results suggest that that development of the ability to detect a change in stimulus level (i.e., the criterion change) does not fully account for the age effects observed when thresholds were defined as the delay between initiation of offset and subsequent onset. Individual Differences Across Conditions   Despite the clear trend for lower thresholds with increasing child age, there were some children even in the youngest age group who performed similarly to adults. These individual differences were strongly correlated across conditions, such that good performance in one condition was a strong predictor of good performance in other conditions. There was also a strong correlation between variance in track reversals and threshold. This is consistent with the possibility that the poorer child performers varied over time in their ability to selectively attend to the optimal stimulus cue. This variability could take the form of occasional lapses in attention, but it could also represent instability in the stimulus cue used to select the  different  interval. The stimuli in the present experiment were based on random noise samples, so the sounds presented in each interval were likely to differ on a number of dimensions in addition to the presence or absence of a gap. A listener who is not as skilled at selectively attending to cues associated with a gap may respond to one of those nonpredictive features. For example, a poorer performer may tend to select the interval associated with greater inherent envelope modulation, particularly when the gap is relatively short and the associated cue is very subtle.   There is some precedence in the psychoacoustic literature for consistently adultlike performance in a subset of young children. For example,  Moore, Ferguson, Halliday, and Riley (2008)  measured pure-tone frequency discrimination thresholds in 6- to 11-year-olds and adults. They found a trend for lower thresholds in older children, with median performance improving from approximately 10% (6–7 years) to 1.5% (adults). Despite this marked improvement in median thresholds, 24% of 6- to 7-year-olds had thresholds within the 95% confidence interval of adult thresholds. That is, some of the youngest children achieved adultlike performance. A parallel training study conducted by  Halliday, Taylor, Edmondson-Jones, and Moore (2008)  showed that performance was predicted by age, nonverbal IQ, and the probability of lapses in attention, indicating that good frequency discrimination thresholds relied on higher-level cognitive abilities. Similar cognitive factors could have affected performance in the present study. Comparisons With  Buss et al. (2014)       Buss et al. (2014)  reported that children achieved adultlike gap detection thresholds earlier in development for wideband Gaussian noise than for narrowband