>Methods   Selective change of cell membrane permeability   Saponin is a natural detergent that selectively removes membrane cholesterols ( 28 ) and produces small pores (40 – 50 Å) in cell membranes ( 29 ). Water molecules can diffuse through these pores and hence the cell membrane permeability is effectively enhanced. Note that saponin does not cross cell membranes, so the intracellular structure, e.g. nuclear envelope, is unlikely to be altered by saponin treatment. To prevent other side effects that may be induced by saponin treatment, only fixed cells were used in the current study. By such a means, cell membrane permeability was increased selectively without altering other cell properties, and this in turn provides an appropriate model system to investigate the precise influence of membrane permeability on diffusion measurements. Sample Preparation   Human myelogenous leukemia K562 cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and cultured in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 50 U/ml penicillin, and 50 μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, CA) under standard culture conditions in a humidified incubator maintained at 5% CO 2  and 37 °C. Once enough cells were cultured, they were collected and washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for about 2 hours. After fixation, cells were washed and divided into three groups, each treated with vehicle (control), low (0.025% w/v) and high (0.05% w/v) concentrations of saponin. Briefly, 10% saponin was added to the fixed cells (at about 10 million cells per ml) to reach a final saponin concentration of 0.025% or 0.05%. After 30 minutes of incubation at room temperature, approximately 30 million cells were centrifuged at 6000 g for 2 minutes in a 0.65ml of Eppendorf tube to form a pellet, and all the liquid on the top was then carefully removed. The estimated intracellular volume fraction was around 72%. There were six samples in each group. To confirm that the saponin treatment did not alter cell size distribution, aliquoted samples were spotted on glass slides and directly imaged with phase contrast microscopy. Over 100 cells were measured for each sample. Cell radii were 9.61 ± 0.66, 9.46 ± 0.73, 9.49 ± 0.56 μm for cell samples with saponin concentrations of 0, 0.025%, 0.05%, respectively. MR experiments   NMR diffusion measurements were performed on an Agilent/Varian 7T MRI system with a 12 mm Doty micro-gradient coil. Temporal ADC spectra were acquired over a broad range of frequencies and effective diffusion times (0.42 ms ≤ Δ eff  ≤ 3000 ms) with five b-values evenly distributed from 0 to 0.6 ms/μm 2 . The diffusion gradients were applied simultaneously on three axes, the maximum gradient strength used was 1.42 T/m. Short diffusion times were achieved using OGSE sequences with apodised cosine-modulated gradient waveforms with a duration of 20 ms on either side of a refocusing pulse. Twelve oscillating frequencies ( f ) were evenly distributed from 50 Hz to 600 Hz, corresponding to 12 effective diffusion times from 0.42 ms to 5 ms (  Δ eff = 1 4 f ). Long diffusion times (equivalent to sampling low frequencies) were achieved using STEAM with a pulsed gradient duration δ = 3 ms. Twelve different effective times from 11 ms to 2999 ms were acquired by varying the mixing time TM but keeping the other parameters the same. A 3 mm axial slice crossing the middle of cell pellets were excited for the collection of NMR signals. By such a means, potential B 1  inhomogeneity and gradient non-linearity effects at the edges of the cell pellets were avoided. Other parameters were: TR = 5 s, NEX (number of excitations) = 2, the number of dummy scans = 2, receiver bandwidth = 50 kHz, spectral resolution = 390.625 Hz, TE = 50 or 15 ms for OGSE and STEAM sequences, respectively. The sample temperature was maintained at ~ 17 °C using a cooling water circulation system. The acquisition time of each diffusion frequency/time was about 1 min.   The intracellular exchange lifetimes were estimated using constant gradient (cg-) experiments as described by Meier et al. ( 13 , 19 ). With the same STEAM sequence, diffusion weighting was achieved by keeping δ = 10 ms and varying the gradient separation Δ in 30 increments. The maximum Δs were 542, 310, 165 ms for cell samples with saponin concentrations of 0, 0.025%, 0.05%, respectively. Each experiment was repeated with two different gradient amplitudes, g = 5 and 150 mT/m. The higher gradient amplitude data were normalized by the lower gradient amplitude data to compensate for any  T 1  relaxation effects ( 19 ). After normalization, the ADC of the slowly decaying component ( D B ) was determined by linear regression using the last 10 data points (shown in  Fig. 1 ). The intracellular exchange lifetime  τ in  was then derived as ( 13 )   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Signal intensities as a function of b-value for cg-experiments with different concentrations of saponin. The red straight lines indicate the best linear regressions of the slowly decaying components at high b-values. The error-bars represent the inter-sample standard deviations in each group (n = 6).   τ i n = 1 γ 2 g 2 δ 2 D B   [1]      where  γ  is the nuclear magnetogyric ratio. The cell membrane permeability  P m  can then be derived as ( 13 , 30 )     P m = 3 τ i n R - R 5 D in   [2]      where  R  is the cell radius and  D in  is the intracellular intrinsic diffusion coefficient. Simulations   Computer simulations were performed based on the cell membrane permeabilities derived from experiments, i.e. 0, 0.01, 0.019, 0.044 μm/ms. The simulations used an improved finite difference method ( 27 , 31 ) and tissues were modeled as spherical cells regularly packed on a face-centered cube (FCC) lattice with intracellular fraction of 68%. The extracellular intrinsic diffusion coefficient was assumed to be the same as the free water diffusion coefficient at 20 °C, i.e.  D ex  = 2 μm 2 /ms ( 32 ), and the intracellular intrinsic diffusion coefficient  D in  was assumed to be one-half of the free water diffusion coefficient ( 33 ), i.e.  D in  = 1 μm 2 /ms. Five different cell radii,  R  = 2.5, 3.75, 5, 7.5, 10 μm, were simulated to investigate the coupled influence of cell size and membrane permeability. The MR sequence parameters were the same as were used in the experiments. Results   Fig. 1  shows the signal intensities measured in cg-experiments as a function of b-value for cells with three different concentrations of saponin. Note that the error-bars, as determined by the standard deviations of six samples in each group, were smaller than the symbol sizes in most cases. The straight lines represent the linear fitting for the natural logarithm of the last 10 data points and their b-values ( 19 ). The samples treated with higher concentrations of saponin showed more rapid signal decays, which indicated larger ADC and higher cell membrane permeability. The  τ in ’s were estimated using  Eq.[1]  to be 317 ± 17 ms, 183 ± 13 ms, and 82 ± 4 ms for the cell samples with saponin concentrations of 0, 0.025%, and 0.05%, respectively. With the approximation that the intracellular intrinsic diffusion coefficient  D in  is about one-half of the free water diffusion coefficient at the same temperature ( 33 ),  D in  was assumed to be 1 μm 2 /ms, and the corresponding mean cell membrane permeabilities were then estimated using  Eq.[2]  as 0.011, 0.019, and 0.044 μm/ms.   Fig. 2  shows the simulated ADC spectra for different cell sizes with different permeabilities. The ADC values at Δ eff  > 10 ms were simulated for conventional pulsed gradient sequences, while those at Δ eff  < 5 ms used cosine-modulated OGSE waveforms. As expected, ADC was observed to increase with increasing permeability, but it is evident that the influence of membrane permeability on ADC was very different at different diffusion times. When Δ eff  was long (> 300 ms), ADC became relatively independent of Δ eff , and significant differences in ADC values were apparent between groups of varying permeabilities. This is consistent with previous results showing that ADC is mainly determined by membrane density and permeability at long diffusion times ( 2 ). When Δ eff  decreased from 100 ms to 1 ms, ADC changed dramatically for typical cell sizes (2.5 μm <  R  < 10 μm) with typical cell membrane permeabilities (0 <  P m  < 0.05 μm/ms) ( 16 , 34 ). Moreover, the ADC differences between groups became smaller with decreasing Δ eff . For typical PGSE-based measurements with 10 ms < Δ eff  < 60 ms, the effects of permeability were usually not negligible. But for typical OGSE-based measurements with oscillating frequency as high as 200 Hz ( 35 , 36 ), the simulated ADCs were almost independent of permeability. When Δ eff  < 1 ms, the ADC differences between groups disappeared indicating ADC values were insensitive to permeability with short diffusion times, as was predicted by computer simulations ( 2 , 27 ).   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   The simulated apparent diffusion spectra for different cell sizes with radius = 2.5 μm ( a ), 5 μm ( b ), and 10 μm ( c ) with cell membrane permeability  P m  ranging from 0 to 0.044 μm/ms. The effective diffusion time (Δ eff ) is shown on the lower X-axis. The oscillating frequency is shown on the upper X-axis for the OGSE cases. Note that Δ eff  is displayed in the reversed direction. Fig. 3  shows the simulated dependence of ADC on cell size with different cell membrane permeabilities at two typical diffusion times. When Δ eff  = 30 ms, which is typical for pulsed gradient diffusion measurements, the dependence of ADC on cell size varies significantly with different cell membrane permeabilities. For example, the ADC of impermeable cells ( P m  = 0) with a cell radius of 5 μm was calculated to be similar (1.7% difference) to that of cells with a radius of 2.5 μm and a cell membrane permeability of 0.011 μm/ms (see the two solid markers in  Figure 3.a ). This indicates that the cell size may be significantly overestimated if the cell membrane permeability is not taken into account in quantitative diffusion measurements. By contrast, when Δ eff  = 1.25 ms ( f  = 200 Hz), which is readily achievable on current animal scanners, the dependence of ADC on cell size is insensitive to cell membrane permeability, which is desirable for accurate estimation of cell size from diffusion measurements.   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   The simulated dependence of apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) on cell radius varies with cell membrane permeability at a long diffusion time of 30 ms ( a ), but is insensitive to permeability at a short diffusion time of 1.25 ms ( b ). The two solid markers in ( a ) represent two ADC values with < 2% difference but with very different cell radii and membrane permeabilities. Fig. 4  shows the measured apparent diffusion spectra for cells treated with different concentrations of saponin. The measured ADCs were larger for samples with higher concentrations of saponin because of higher permeabilities. The effects of permeability on the measured ADCs were in agreement with the simulation results shown in  Fig. 2 . For the sizes of cells investigated here (radius 9.5 ± 0.6 μm), the OGSE-based measurements with shorter Δ eff  were much less affected by changes of permeability than PGSE-based measurements. The ADC differences between different groups were less than 10% at Δ eff  = 5 ms and became < 5% when Δ eff  was smaller than 1.25 ms, indicating no significant differences between ADC values even with various membrane permeabilities.   Fig. 4.     Open in a new tab   The diffusion time (Δ eff ) dependent apparent diffusion coefficients (ADCs) of cells treated with different concentrations of saponin and measured by STEAM (left) or OGSE (right). The error-bars represent the inter-sample standard deviation in each group. The effective diffusion time (Δ eff ) is shown on the lower X-axis. The oscillating frequency is shown on the upper X-axis for the OGSE measurements. Δ eff  is displayed in the reversed direction. Discussion   The goal of this study was to investigate the influence of cell membrane permeability on MR diffusion measurements over a broad range of diffusion times and physiologically relevant permeabilities, and to demonstrate that the effects of permeability variations can be minimized using short diffusion times. Cells were treated with either of two concentrations of saponin to vary the cell membrane permeability that was calculated from cg-experiments ( Fig. 1 ) to range from 0.011 μm/ms to 0.044 μm/ms, corresponding to intracellular exchange lifetime  τ in  82 – 317 ms. Note that this is a physiologically relevant range for typical  τ in  of tumor cells and those undergoing apoptosis. For example, the transmembrane water exchange rate has been reported as 2.9±0.8 s −1  ( τ in  = 344 ± 1.25 ms) for viable human brain tumor ( 22 ), and 1.4 – 6.8 s −1  ( τ in  = 147–714 ms) for tumor cells undergo apoptosis ( 21 ). The saponin treatment at either 0.025 or 0.05% had no detectable effect on the sizes of the fixed cells. The effects of permeability on the measured ADCs were then investigated at a broad range of effective diffusion times (0.42 ms < Δ eff  < 3000 ms). The results confirmed that the OGSE measurements are not sensitive to changes of permeability, especially at higher oscillating frequencies. This is an encouraging result for the implementation of OGSE imaging of tissues. For example, ADC values obtained using PGSE measurements are usually suggested as indicators of cellularity and have been widely used to monitor tumor response to treatment ( 37 ). However, cell membrane permeability also changes in treated tumors, and has been reported to increase significantly following apoptotic cell death ( 21 ), which can then also significantly increase ADC values because water is no longer as restricted ( 38 ). This may explain some observations that the ADC and tumor cellularity are not always strongly correlated ( 10 , 39 , 40 ). Recently, there has been an increasing interest in implementing OGSE sequences to study tissues, including tumors, to probe structural variations at very small length scales ( 26 , 41 ), but the cell membrane is a major restricting barrier to water molecules that may still affect OGSE measurements when the diffusion time is of the order of the time to diffuse across a cell. The current study suggests that OGSE measurements in cells, ranging in size down to a radius of 2.5 μm, are not sensitive to changes in cell membrane permeability; this result implies that ADC values obtained using OGSE sequences with moderately high frequencies (~ 200 Hz) simply reflect the averaged intra- and extra-cellular diffusion properties on small length scales without the influence from cellular-level barriers. Such a conclusion may improve the interpretation of OGSE measurements in cancer and other pathologies. It should be pointed out that, if smaller cells ( R  < 2.5 μm) were imaged, higher frequencies (> 200 Hz) would be required to minimize the influence of cell membrane permeability on OGSE measurements.   Besides cg-experiments, several other NMR approaches which rely on different relaxation or diffusion properties have also been proposed to measure  τ in  ( 16 , 17 , 21 , 42 – 44 ). The cg-experiment was chosen in this study because it can be easily implemented without a need to modify pulse sequences ( 42 ) or to add extra contrast agents ( 44 ). Over the wide range of b-values used in cg-experiments, the signal decay may not be mono-exponential. The ADC of the slowly decaying component ( D B ) at high b-values is mainly determined by the transmembrane flux and the intracellular exchange lifetime  τ in  can then be derived from  Eq.[1]  ( 19 ). However, it should be noted that the estimation of  τ in  may be slightly biased in this study. As discussed by Meier et al ( 13 ), at least two requirements need to be fulfilled for measuring  τ in  accurately with cg-experiments. First, the derivation of  τ in  is through the modified Karger model ( 45 ), which assumes a long diffusion time (Δ• D in / R 2  ≫ 1). The maximum Δ for the cells treated with 0.05% saponin was only 165 ms (Δ• D in / R 2  ~ 1.65), which means the long diffusion time assumption was not completely satisfied. Note that the diffusion time could not be further increased due to the limitation of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at long diffusion times. Even for Δ = 165 ms used in the current study, due to the fast signal decays with increasing Δ ( Fig. 1 ), the corresponding signal was already below 0.1% of the non-diffusion weighted signals. Second, since the stimulated echo cg-experiment requires  T 1 -weighting correction, the  τ in  cannot be measured accurately unless intra- and extra-cellular longitudinal relaxations are similar. The measured  T 1 s for the cell samples were around 2 sec, while  T 1  for the pure extracellular PBS was about 3 sec. All of above discrepancies may bias the accurate estimation of  τ in , as well as the cell membrane permeability. However, such a bias does not affect the current experimental approach qualitatively, i.e. higher concentration of saponin resulted in higher cell membrane permeability in our experiments.   The comparison between the simulated ADCs ( Fig. 2e ) and the measured ( Fig. 3a ) reveals two discrepancies. First, the simulated ADC values were almost constant when Δ eff  > 500 ms, while the measured ADCs dropped slightly with increasing Δ eff . Our observation that ADCs decreased with increasing Δ eff  at long diffusion times is consistent with previous results in skeletal muscle ( 46 ), and it may be explained by the unordered packing of cells ( 47 ). Our simulations were based on a collection of regularly packed spherical cells, but cells are not spherical and, as prepared in these studies, pack randomly and without order. The spatially extended random restrictions result in a long-time tail in the dispersion of ADC with Δ eff , which has been suggested to characterize the structural disorder ( 47 , 48 ). Second, the simulated ADC values with  P m  = 0.044 μm/ms were similar to that of the 0.05% saponin cells measured with  P m  of 0.044 μm/ms, but the simulated ADC values with  P m  = 0.011 μm/ms were much larger than that of the control cells measured with  P m  of 0.011 μm/ms. It may be due to the inaccurate measurements of permeability or the influence of the random packing of cells ( 47 ).   Although several models ( 49 ) have previously been developed to account for permeability effects, recent studies that have used diffusion data to estimate axon diameters or tumor cell sizes have, for simplicity, usually ignored water exchange between the intra- and extracellular spaces ( 50 – 52 ). This assumes that the cell membrane permeability is small, so  τ in  is much longer than the diffusion time, and consequently only a small fraction of water is exchanged during diffusion measurements. Based on the current simulation results,  τ in  should be at least 15 times larger than the effective diffusion time, Δ eff , so that exchange could be ignored (ADC difference < 5%). It should also be noted that the influence of permeability is different for different b-values with the same diffusion time. Only small b-values (≤0.6 ms/μm 2 ) were used to measure ADC in this study, where the mono-exponential decay model appeared appropriate. However, the behavior of signal decay with large b-value (> 2 ms/μm 2 ) would be more complex and constant-time (ct-) experiments cannot be well described by the Karger model ( 13 , 53 ). It has been found that the diffusion measurements for larger b-values are even more sensitive to changes in cell membrane permeability ( 54 ).   Supported by simulations and experiments, cosine-modulated OGSE measurements with shorter effective diffusion times are less affected by changes in cell membrane permeability. Thus OGSE should be more specific for detecting other microstructural changes ( 25 , 41 , 55 ). Here we should distinguish between the effective diffusion time Δ eff  and the total duration of the oscillating gradient waveform Δ total . Water molecules diffuse and experience gradient effects over the total duration of the oscillating gradient waveform. Δ total  is usually longer than 40 ms for cosine-modulated gradient waveforms, during which a large fraction of water can exchange between the intra- and extracellular spaces. However, the rapid reversal of the gradient during the time it is on ensures that only the fraction that exchanges during such a period affects the overall ADC. T