>METHODS   Simulations   Simulation studies were performed to confirm the superiority of the trapezoid-cosine waveform over the cosine waveform and to show the dependence of the frequency localization on the OGSE waveform polarity. Without loss of generality, the dependence of frequency localization on the OGSE waveform polarity was investigated for the case where the frequency of the waveform is 62.5 Hz.   Simulations were also performed to find the acquisition parameters (TE,  b -value) that would yield the optimal DNR using a wide range of T 2  values that covers both gray and white matter at 3 T: T 2  = 50 – 100 ms ( 20 ), and a wide range of diffusion coefficients that covers different level of diffusivity: D = 250 – 1500 × 10 −6  mm 2 /s. In general, the higher the encoding frequency of the diffusion-encoding gradient waveform, the lower the maximum  b -value that can be achieved for the same TE (i.e., lower DNR). Therefore, we chose to optimize our DNR at the highest encoding frequency that would be implemented, which is 63 Hz. The reason for this highest encoding frequency is that at diffusion-encoding frequency > 63 Hz, the resulting echo time is longer than 120 ms even for a b-value of only 100 s/mm 2 . The DNR simulation was performed with different echo times for double-sine, cosine, and trapezoid-cosine diffusion-encoding waveforms.   All simulations assumed gradient hardware limits: a maximum gradient amplitude of 50 mT/m and a maximum slew rate of 100 mT/m/ms. The sequence timing was calculated based on an in-plane resolution of 2 × 2 mm 2 ; 3-interleaf EPI readout trajectory with partial Fourier encoding with 24 over scan lines; and a readout bandwidth of +/−125kHz. In vivo Measurements   Four healthy volunteers were scanned on a 3T GE MR750 scanner (General Electric Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) using an eight-channel head coil. Written informed consent was obtained from each volunteer. The maximum gradient strength is 50 mT/m. Although the maximum slew rate of the system is 200 mT/m/ms, a maximum slew rate of 100 mT/m/ms was used to avoid peripheral nerve stimulation.   Trapezoid-cosine OGSE waveforms were designed to replace the traditional PGSE waveform in a single-refocused spin-echo diffusion-weighted sequence. Trapezoid-cosine OGSE waveforms corresponding to three encoding frequencies ( ω  = 18 Hz, 44 Hz, and 63 Hz) were implemented. The  b -value was kept constant at 200 s/mm 2 . To keep the  b -value and TE constant for all OGSE experiments, an increasing number of periods of the waveform were used with increasing encoding frequency as follows: 2, 4, and 6 periods for encoding frequencies of 18Hz, 44 Hz, and 63 Hz, respectively. Notice that the total diffusion encoding duration  δ  on either side of the refocusing pulse is constant (48 ms) across encoding frequencies. For comparison, a PGSE DWI experiment with a diffusion time of 20 ms and a matched  b -value was also carried out. Tetrahedral diffusion encoding was used to simultaneously exploit the maximum strength of the G x , G y , and G z  gradients and reduce the TE compared to standard diffusion gradient encoding where only the principal gradient direction is applied ( 21 ).   For all experiments, a 3-interleaf EPI trajectory was used. Parallel imaging with acceleration factor of three ( 22 ) was used to fill in the  k -space gap of each interleaf. Other parameters are: TE/TR = 116/3000 ms, FOV= 240mm, acquisition matrix = 128 × 128, 2 mm 2  resolution in-plane, 5 mm slice thickness with no slice gap, 8 sagittal slices, partial Fourier encoding with 24 over scan lines (i.e. half scan factor = 68.75%), and 15 repetitions of the diffusion scheme. For anatomical reference, a 15-direction  b  = 1000 s/mm 2  DTI data set with one  b = 0  image was acquired (TE/TR = 45/3000 ms) using a matched resolution, slice prescription, and readout trajectory.   FOV/2 EPI ghosting parameters were selected based on the best of the 15 fully-sampled  b = 0  scans (as defined by the lowest grappa fit-error to the data ( 23 )) through the use of an entropy-based method ( 24 , 25 ). After the ghost correction, each interleaf was reconstructed separately using GRAPPA ( 26 , 27 ). Non-acquired phase encoding lines (partial Fourier encoding) were reconstructed by projection onto convex sets ( 28 , 29 ). For all experiments, rigid-body registration of diffusion-weighted images to the  b = 0  image was performed. Estimation of ADC and Diffusion Spectrum   Given the assumption that  Eq. [4]  holds, the diffusion spectrum at the peak frequency,  ω , of the OGSE encoding spectrum can be estimated using the following equation     D ( ω ) ≈ 1 b ln ( S 0 ( ω , T E ) S b ( ω , T E ) ) ,   [10]      where  S b (ω,TE)  and  S 0 (ω,TE)  are the signals at the echo time TE with and without diffusion encoding being active. To minimize the effects of noise and possible additional partial volume due to further registration across different experiments (different encoding frequencies), the ADC frequency dependence analysis was done only on ROIs in white matter regions with known predominant uni-directional fibers, such as the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum. RESULTS   Simulations   Superiority of trapezoid-cosine waveform   Figure 2(a, b)  compares the cosine waveform with a matched trapezoid-cosine waveform at the encoding frequency of 63 Hz, showing the ability of the trapezoid-cosine waveform to exploit the maximum slew rate and thereby achieve a higher  b -value for a given TE. As shown in  Figure 2(c, d) , the approximation of the cosine waveform by the trapezoid-cosine waveform does not noticeably change the diffusion-encoding gradient-induced phase accumulation and (more importantly) also does not alter the encoding spectrum.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Comparison between cosine and trapezoid-cosine waveforms in terms of (a) the time-matched waveforms (b) corresponding slew rates, (c) 0 th  moments, and (d) encoding frequencies. The trapezoid-cosine waveform operates either at maximum gradient amplitude or maximum slew rate modes while the cosine waveform does not (a, b). Therefore, the resulting b-value is higher with the trapezoid-cosine than with the cosine waveform. The differences between the encoding spectrums of trapezoid-cosine and cosine waveforms are minimal (d). OGSE waveform polarity and the resulting frequency selectivity   For the sequence timing of the simulation, the waveform separation time  Δ  was 55.7 ms. Thus, at the OGSE waveform frequency of 62.5 Hz,   sin 2 ω 0 Δ 2 = 0.9965  (90+/180+ configuration) while   cos 2 ω 0 Δ 2 = 0.0035  (90+/180− configuration). Therefore, the 90+/180+ configuration gives better frequency localization as is evident from  Figure 3 . We note that since   sin 2 ω Δ 2  does not reach its maximum value at  ω  =  ω 0 , the peak frequency of the encoding spectrum (63 Hz) is slightly different from the waveform frequency (62.5 Hz). For the 90+/180− configuration, since   cos 2 ω Δ 2 ≈ 0  at the peak frequency of the sinc functions  ω  = ± ω 0  ( Eq. [5] ), the main lobes of the  sinc  functions are split into two half-magnitude lobes. This splitting leads to significant reduction in the frequency localization of the encoding spectrum ( Figure 3 ).   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Dependence of frequency selectivity on the polarities of the OGSE waveform on the two sides of the refocusing pulse. At waveform oscillating frequency of  ω 0  = 62.5 Hz and waveform separation Δ = 55.7 ms, the 90+/180+ configuration resulted in better frequency localization than the 90+/180− configuration. The encoding spectrum of the 90+/180− configuration had two lobes with approximately equal amplitudes because two zeros of   cos 2 ω Δ 2  occurred at  ω ≈ ±ω 0  where the sinc functions reached their maxima ( Eq. [5] ). The waveform polarity was varied for each of the different encoding spectra of the in vivo experiment to optimize frequency selectivity. Specifically, the best configurations found were 90+/180+ and 90+/180− for the 44 Hz and 18 Hz frequencies, respectively.  Figure 4  shows the optimized encoding spectra of all of the employed waveforms (with that of a matched  b -value PGSE sequence labeled as 0 Hz). The FWHM of the main lobes for all three OGSE waveforms was 8.5 Hz. The ratio between the maximum amplitudes of the side lobe and the main lobe was 0.15, 0.28, and 0.15 for the waveforms with encoding frequencies 18 Hz, 44 Hz, and 63 Hz, respectively.   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Encoding spectrums of the employed trapezoid-cosine waveforms. All trapezoid-cosine waveforms had FWHM = 8.5 Hz. Their maximum amplitude ratios between side lobes and main lobes were 0.15, 0.28, and 0.15 for the waveforms with encoding frequencies 18 Hz, 44 Hz, and 63 Hz, respectively. The employed PGSE waveform (at the diffusion time Δ = 20 ms), labeled as 0 Hz, had FWHM = 50 Hz. DNR optimization   Figure 5  shows the variation of DNR with echo time for the double-sine, cosine, and trapezoid-cosine waveforms at T 2  = 80 ms and D = 750 × 10 −6  mm 2 /s. The DNR plots in  Figure 5  were normalized by the DNR of a minimum-TE PGSE sequence with matched resolution but with a  b -value = 1000 s/mm 2 . The observed “saw-tooth” shapes of the DNR curves arose because an increase in TE will lead to an increase in  b -value only if the extra time is long enough to fit in a whole period of the employed diffusion-encoding gradient waveform. As predicted, the trapezoid-cosine waveform gave the highest DNR with the maximum value of approximately 1.5 times higher than that of the cosine waveform. The maximum DNR was achieved at TE = 116 ms which corresponded to a  b -value of 200 s/mm 2 . However, even at this maximum value, the DNR of the OGSE experiment is only approximately 10% of the DNR of a conventional PGSE DWI experiment. Therefore, increasing   SNR 0 ¯  (in  Eq. [9] ) through the use of signal averaging is needed to further improve the DNR and hence the quality of the estimated diffusion spectrum.   Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Relative DNR with respect to echo times at T 2  = 80 ms and D = 750 × 10 −6  mm 2 /s. The plotted DNR curves were normalized to the DNR of a minimum-TE PGSE sequence with matched resolution but with  b -value = 1000 mm 2 /s. The trapezoid-cosine waveform was superior to both double-sine and sine waveforms. The maximum DNR was achieved at TE = 116 ms for the trapezoid-cosine waveform. The optimal TE in terms of DNR does not change when varying the measured diffusion coefficient  D  in the range 250 – 1500 × 10 −6  mm 2 /s. For a T 2  within the range of 50 – 76 ms, the optimal TE is 86 ms. When T 2  is in the 76 – 100 ms range, the optimal TE is 116 ms. However, the difference between DNR values at TE = 86 ms and TE = 116 ms (with varying T 2 ) does not exceed 20%. In vivo Results   Figure 6  shows the estimated mean ADCs of one subject in the corpus callosum area, depicted by the red rectangle in the reference image. For anatomical reference, the fractional anisotropy (FA) map and color-coded FA map in this area are also shown. As the encoding frequency of the OGSE experiments increases, regions in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum (red arrows) exhibit increased ADC as expected for restricted diffusion ( 5 , 7 ). To get a clearer observation of the trend, the mean and standard deviation within ROIs of the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum are plotted in  Figure 7 . A similar frequency dependence of the ADC was also observed in the three other subjects. The frequency dependence of the ADC of the OGSE experiment was also compared to the ADC of the PGSE experiment (denoted as 0 Hz frequency). Although the peak of the frequency-encoding spectrum of the PGSE encoding is at 0 Hz, its wide bandwidth (FWHM of 50 Hz) largely blurs the frequency selectivity of the measured ADC. The non-localized frequency selectivity of the PGSE experiment should partially explain the fact that the ADC of the PGSE is higher than that of the OGSE at the frequency of 18 Hz. It should be also emphasized that additional experiments performed on a water phantom (i.e. no diffusion restriction) found no dependencies on the encoding frequency chosen in the ADC maps (i.e. the ADC remained constant) ( Figure 7a ).   Figure 6.     Open in a new tab   Measured mean ADC at different frequencies at the corpus callosum (depicted by the red rectangle on the first reference image). Reference FA map and color-coded FA map were estimated from a separate  b  = 1000 s/mm 2  DTI acquisition with the resolution matched to that of OGSE experiments. Mean ADC labeled as 0 Hz is estimated from a PGSE acquisition with all parameters (including  b -value and TE) matched to that of OGSE experiments. For OGSE experiments (18 Hz, 44 Hz, and 63 Hz), increase in ADC with increase in encoding frequency was observed in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum as pointed out by the red arrows. Figure 7.     Open in a new tab   Mean and standard deviation of measured ADC within ROIs (shown in magenta in the reference image in  Figure 6 ) on four subjects in (a) genu (ROI of 60 voxels) of the corpus callosum, and (b) splenium (ROI of 70 voxels) of the corpus callosum. ADC measured in a water phantom was also shown for reference in (a). ADC at 0Hz was estimated from a PGSE experiment. In the genu and spenium of the corpus callosum, OGSE experiments showed dependence of ADC on the encoding frequency. In water phantom, no frequency dependence was observed. Due to its broad encoding spectrum, the PGSE experiment yields ADC with higher value than that of the OGSE experiment at 18 Hz. DISCUSSION   Several human studies have attempted to investigate the dependence of measured ADC with diffusion times ( 4 , 30 , 31 ). Interestingly, regarding the ADC being time-dependent, the findings were positive in the study by Horsfield  et al  ( 30 ) and negative in those by Le Bihan  et al  ( 31 ) and Clark  et al  ( 4 ). The positive finding by Horsfield  et al , however, is quite controversial due to the concomitant changes of both diffusion time and  b -value in the experiments. The latter two studies used either stimulated-echo diffusion-encoding ( 31 ), which is PGSE-like, or oscillating trapezoid-sine encoding ( 4 ), which is sine-like. From Stepisnik’s diffusion spectrum point of view, it is important to note that these two diffusion-encoding schemes are primarily sensitive to the 0 Hz frequency regardless of the waveform timing ( 10 ), and therefore obscure the frequency/time-dependence of the measured ADC. Furthermore, the effective diffusion times employed in these studies were relatively long with minimum effective diffusion times of 8 ms ( 4 ). These are diffusion times where the ADC is already saturated by diffusion restriction in neuronal tissue.   The present study provides two significant contributions. Firstly, the presented formulation enables a thorough optimization of the OGSE diffusion-encoding waveform, both with regards to the shape and the timing of the waveform. The maximum gradient slew rate and gradient amplitude were fully exploited through the use of a trapezoid-cosine waveform, which yielded a higher  b -value while maintaining a similar echo time and encoding spectrum as its cosine counterpart ( Figure 2 ). Taking into consideration the DNR and T 2 -decay further optimized the waveforms as shown in  Figure 5 .   An interesting finding of the present study was the dependence of the diffusion-encoding spectrum on the polarity of the OGSE waveforms on the two sides of the refocusing pulse and the timing of the waveform ( δ, Δ ). For a given waveform duration  δ  and frequency  ω 0 , the best frequency selectivity (in terms of the FWHM of main lobes and the ripples) is achieved with the value of  Δ  and the waveform polarity that maximize   H 2 ( ω 0 Δ 2 ) . Additionally,  Eq. [5]  shows that given a fixed diffusion-encoding duration  δ  and an optimal  Δ , OGSE waveforms with different frequencies will have encoding spectrums with the same FWHM and ripple. The number of waveform periods fitted in  δ  thus becomes irrelevant to the frequency localization. This finding is important since it implies that the FWHM and ripple of OGSE encoding spectrum is limited only by  δ  and hence the echo time (TE).   Secondly, with these carefully designed OGSE waveforms, we were able to observe in vivo and on a human MR system the dependence of the measured ADC on the diffusion-encoding gradient waveform. Currently, these observed changes are limited to white-matter-dominant regions such as the corpus callosum where large coherent fiber bundles exist, as can be seen in the color-coded FA reference maps ( Figure 6 ,  7 ). Nevertheless, this result serves as the first proof of the feasibility of OGSE on a human MR system. Since the employed cosine-trapezoid waveform is time-matched and spectrum-matched ( Figure 2 ) with the cosine waveform, heuristically, the effective diffusion time of the trapezoid-cosine waveform can be approximated by that of its cosine waveform counterpart. In this case, the effective diffusion times used in the current experiment are 4 ms, 6 ms, and 12 ms ( 5 ), corresponding to the 63 Hz, 44 Hz, and 18 Hz encoding spectrums, respectively. Considering a diffusion coefficient of ~ 3 × 10 −3  mm 2 /s (that of unrestricted water at 37°C ( 5 )), the 1D root-mean-squared displacements are 4.9 μm, 6 μm, and 8.5μm in 4ms, 6ms, and 12 ms, respectively. Therefore, the observed frequency/time dependence of ADC suggests that the typical restriction diameter in the human genu and splenium of the corpus callosum is of several micrometers. In a previous study using PGSE acquisition and the single-diameter fiber model, a mean fiber diameter of 6 – 10 μm was reported in human genu and splenium of the corpus callosum ( 32 ), which agrees well with our data.   Multiple factors resulting from the in vivo experimental setting can bias the ADC frequency dependence analysis. First and foremost, the  b -value (200 s/mm 2 ) employed in the current study is relatively low. As suggested by Le Bihan ( 33 ), the measured diffusion signal at this low  b -value might be contaminated with intra-voxel incoherent motion (IVIM) signal. Two models were previously proposed to explain the source of IVIM signal ( 34 ):     Model 1: Blood flow goes through multiple capillary segments with random orientation during the diffusion time.   Model 2: There exist multiple capillary segments with random orientation within a voxel, however, blood flow does not change from one capillary segment to another segment during the diffusion time.     Since our proposed trapezoid-cosine waveform is velocity-compensated (see  Appendix ), the contribution of IVIM signal from model 2, which is flow-like, is quite minimal. Further investigation is still needed to assess the contribution of the IVIM signal from model 1.   For fast data acquisition, the readout trajectory of choice in the current study is EPI. The additional diffusion weighting that the readout waveform introduces is negligible. With the employed acquisition parameters (24 over scan lines, 24 cm × 24 cm FOV, readout bandwidth +/−125 kHz, echo spacing 692 μs), the additional  b -value at the center of  k -space is 0.02 s/mm 2 .   Important artifacts induced by EPI acquisitions are ghosting due to gradient delays and misregistration due to motion between different volumes within