>Material and Methods   DOM Extract Preparation   200 L of surface seawater were collected at the end of the Ellen Browning Scripps Memorial Pier, San Diego, California, USA, on February 26, 2021, between 11:00 and 19:00 PDT. The seawater was filtered through an AcroPak 0.8/0.45 μm Supor membrane filter (Pall Corporation) and subsequently acidified to a pH of 2 with a total volume of 260 mL HCl (37%, trace metal grade). For solid phase extraction (SPE), Agilent Bond Elut PPL styrene-divinylbenzene polymer cartridges with 5 g of bed mass and 60 mL of column volume were used. Prior to loading, the cartridges were activated with 30 mL of methanol (MeOH) and then washed with 30 mL of H 2 O (pH 2, LCMS grade) and 30 mL of MeOH (LCMS grade), followed by equilibration with 30 mL of H 2 O (pH 2, LCMS grade). For sample loading, acidified seawater was drawn through a serological glass pipet connected to polypropylene tubing that split into 8 SPE PPL cartridges in parallel. We used a vacuum SPE station (Agilent 20 port SPE station) to maintain a flow rate of approximately 20 mL/min/cartridge and a total loading time of 20 h. A process blank was collected using 4 L of acidified H 2 O (pH2, LCMS grade) and a 5 g cartridge using the same SPE protocol as that above. After sample loading, the cartridges were desalted with 60 mL of H 2 O (pH 2, LCMS grade) and dried under N 2  gas. After drying, the cartridges were eluted with 20 mL of MeOH per cartridge, resulting in a total of 160 mL of the sample extract. An internal standard (IS) mix was added, containing 5 μg of each of the following compounds in MeOH: domoic acid, kainic acid, isoxaben, irgarol, imazapyr, heroin, methamphetamine, and cocaine. Of the pooled sample, 150 mL were then aliquoted into 100 individual HPLC vials (1.5 mL each). The blank sample was eluted with 10 mL MeOH and aliquoted into 2 mL vials. All vials were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge overnight at room temperature. Six aliquots were weighed after the drying process, resulting in 1.8 mg of total sample dry mass per vial. Two representative aliquots were each redissolved in 2 L of H 2 O (pH 2) for total organic carbon (TOC) measurements, resulting in 30.0 μmol/L and 0.72 mg of C/vial. The overall extraction efficiency was 43.3%. Algae Extract Preparation   Lyophilized cells from  Synechococcus  sp. were purchased from Merck (Product number 491764). A 0.83 g portion of cell material was suspended in 50 mL of LCMS-grade MeOH in a MeOH-rinsed Falcon tube. The mixture was then sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 5000 RCF for 10 min. The supernatant was decanted to a new Falcon tube, dried under N 2 , and redissolved in Milli-Q water. This was sonicated and centrifuged, and the supernatant was transferred to a 250 mL bottle, diluted to 150 mL, and acidified with 150 μL of HCl. 8 mL of the solution was extracted on a preconditioned PPL cartridge (1 g; Agilent), and retained metabolites were eluted with MeOH and dried under N 2 . This extract was redissolved in 2 mL of MeOH, and 0.1 mL was taken for DOC analysis. This sample was dried under N 2  and redissolved in 36.5 mL of Milli-Q water. The DOC concentration was 5.79 μg/mL after subtraction of the blank, indicating 2.1 mg/mL C in 2 mL of the stock solution. From the stock solution, three new stock solutions with 1800, 600, and 200 μg/mL were prepared in MeOH. Ring-Study Samples   The final sample preparation scheme for the ring study is shown in  Figure   . Samples were prepared from the dried DOM and algae extracts, as described in the following: the 60 dried DOM extracts from San Diego were redissolved in 100 μL of MeOH (Optima LCMS grade, Thermo Fisher) each, from which 50 μL were transferred into new 2 mL glass vials (Thermo Fisher, Level 3), resulting in a total of 120 DOM samples. To 28 of these vials, 25 μL of 1800 μg/mL algae extract was added (A45 M sample). To the next 28 vials, 25 μL of 600 μg/mL algae extract was added (A15 M sample). To the last 28 vials, 25 μL of a 200 μg/mL algae extract was added (A5M sample). Finally, 25 μL of 1800 μg/mL algae extract was added to 28 new vials and mixed with 50 μL of MeOH (A sample). For the blank samples, 4 blank aliquots were each redissolved in 100 μL MeOH, pooled, and 150 μL of the standard mix was added. 18 μL of the resulting solution was aliquoted into 28 new 2 mL vials. Finally, all vials were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge at 35 °C, capped, and shipped to the participating laboratories.   1.     Open in a new tab   Experimental and analysis scheme. Dissolved organic matter (DOM) and algae extracts were prepared and mixed locally and sent out to the participating laboratories for data acquisition using standardized methodology. Acquired data was then deposited to the MassIVE repository and retrieved for data analysis using an open-source analysis pipeline. (Mzmine logo credit: mzio GmbH; GNPS2, GNPS dashboard, and FBmn STATS logo credit: Mingxun Wang & Daniel Petras). LC–MS/MS Analysis   For LC–MS/MS analyses, the samples were redissolved in 200 μL of 50% aq. MeOH (Optima LCMS grade, Thermo Fisher), and process blanks were redissolved in 100 μL of 50% aq. MeOH (Optima LCMS grade, Thermo Fisher). Final concentrations are displayed in  Table S1,  and authentic standard compounds are listed in  Table S2 . For each LC–MS analysis, 5–10 μL of the sample was injected.   Reliable comparisons across instruments require that chromatographic and MS acquisition settings be standardized as much as possible. Thus, for LC–MS/MS data acquisition, the following standardized parameters were prescribed for all participating laboratories. For LC separation, a default C18 UHPLC column with particle sizes <2 μm and column dimensions of 2 mm diameter and 10 or 15 cm length was recommended. A detailed overview of columns and LC methods is provided in  Table S3 . Mobile phases consisted of H 2 O (Optima LCMS grade, Thermo Fisher) (A) and acetonitrile (Optima LCMS grade, Thermo Fisher) (B), both containing 0.1% formic acid (FA, Optima LCMS grade, Thermo Fisher). Default flow rates of 0.4 mL/min and a linear two-step gradient starting at 5% B, followed by a linear gradient beginning at 0.5 min from 5 to 50% B until 7 min, followed by a second linear gradient to 99% B, until 10 min, were applied by most laboratories. MS/MS data was acquired in both positive and negative ionization modes using DDA. Detailed MS/MS settings from each laboratory are provided in  Table S4 . Data Analysis   The LC–MS/MS raw files were converted to. mzML format using msConvert (ProteoWizard) and uploaded to the MassIVE repository ( https://massive.ucsd.edu/ ). The data was analyzed as individual data sets through CMN and FBMN in GNPS­( https://gnps.ucsd.edu ) and as a unified global data set including all samples through both CMN and FBMN workflows on the GNPS2 platform ( https://gnps2.org ). Data preprocessing for FBMN, which takes into account MS1 extracted ion chromatograms for feature abundance measurements, was carried out with mzmine (ver. 4.2.0). CMN uses raw data directly, basing feature abundances on maximum precursor intensity, which does not necessarily correspond to peak apexes and thus is quantitatively less accurate than FBMN. In both cases, MS/MS spectra within the data set are compared to each other to create a molecular network in addition to spectral matching to public library spectra, providing structural annotations. Detailed settings and URLs of the processed molecular networking jobs are provided in the  Supporting Information . Following FBMN and CMN data processing in GNPS2, downstream data cleanup included the removal of features that had occurred in the process blanks. We used a threshold whereby features that showed more than 30% intensity in blanks compared to samples were removed. This cutoff is typically user-defined and can be lowered or increased to adjust to the needs of a specific study (e.g., high or low levels of background contamination or desired robustness). Following blank removal, features with zero intensity were imputed, and normalization to total ion current (TIC) before Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) and Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance (PERMANOVA) using the Bray–Curtis dissimilarity metric was performed with the FBMN Stats App ( https://fbmn-statsguide.gnps2.org/ ). UpSet plots were generated with Intervene ( https://asntech.shinyapps.io/intervene/ ).  Results and Discussion   Assessment of LC–MS/MS Data and Methodological Aspects that Drive Data Set Suitability for Unified Analysis   Twenty-four laboratories completed the data acquisition and submitted their data to the public MassIVE data repository ( https://massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/ ), an overview of all data sets is provided in the supplemental csv table. During inspection of the data via the GNPS dashboard ( https://dashboard.gnps2.org/ ), we visualized LC–MS/MS data as heatmaps with MS/MS events indicated as blue checkmarks ( Figures   A and  S13 ).   2.     Open in a new tab   Overview of LC–MS/MS data. (A) LC–MS/MS (ESI+) heatmaps and MS/MS placement for a representative sample (A45M) for each analyzing laboratory. Data sets from laboratories (a–o) were selected for subsequent unified analysis. (B) Extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) of the internal standard irgarol for the selected Orbitrap data sets (ESI+) normalized to the highest peak. Our criterion for inclusion in the unified data set for further in-depth analysis was that at least six out of eight internal standards had to be correctly matched to the respective GNPS library entries in positive ESI mode. As a first assessment of data amenability for unified analysis through FBMN, library ID matching of added IS was evaluated individually for each laboratory using CMN. Five laboratories matched all eight standards, seven laboratories matched seven standards, four laboratories matched six standards, and another eight laboratories matched less than six standards. Reasons for not matching standards may include poor ionization, insufficient mass accuracy, low scan rates, and/or inadequate DDA parameter selection, such as omission of dynamic exclusion or inconsistent setting of collision energies. In DDA experiments, low scan rates and long duty cycles reduce the number of MS/MS events acquired, which lowers the chance that internal standards are selected. Dynamic exclusion is designed to temporarily prevent redundant reacquisition of already fragmented precursor ions. If dynamic exclusion is not used, the instrument repeatedly targets the same intense background or matrix ions and “wastes” MS/MS events instead of sampling a broader set of precursors, potentially excluding spiked standards. Likewise, suboptimal collision energies can produce either poorly- or overfragmented spectra with low similarity to reference spectra, further decreasing the rate of successful standard identification. It is important to point out that CMN is an MS/MS-based data analysis strategy, mainly used for qualitative analysis. CMN uses spectral counts or precursor intensities for semiquantitative estimations, which are less sensitive and less accurate than MS1-based quantification approaches, such as FBMN.   The total number of library IDs matched within each data set is shown in  Figure    and full tables, including those that were not selected for subsequent co-analyses, are shown in  Table S5 . For the ESI+ CMN data, these numbers range from 71 to 158 for the data sets selected for further coanalysis and from 0 to 107 for those that were not selected. The total number of clustered features (clusters) ranged from 1375 to 5061 for selected data sets, showing that the proportion of obtained spectra that were assigned to library IDs was low, averaging 3.8% across the selected data sets, which is comparable to other DOM LC–MS/MS data.  ,,   Due to its sheer complexity, only a small fraction of features in DOM are selected for fragmentation during DDA. Taking into account this subsampling bias during DDA, the true annotation rate must be substantially lower than the stated average of 3.8%. This implies that only a small portion of the diversity that constitutes DOM can currently be linked to specific molecular structures. Notably, the number of library IDs did not scale with the number of MS/MS features across data sets (linear regression,  R   2  = 0.04). This occurs because the more intense peaks in each data set were the ones matching library spectra. Acquiring MS/MS data from lower intensity features in a complex sample, such as DOM, will increase the number of spectra for previously unexplored compounds without spectral library entries. In comparison to the ESI+ data, the ESI- data generally yielded lower numbers of features and library matches, the latter being mainly driven by the limited amount of negative mode CID spectra in the spectral libraries used.   3.     Open in a new tab   Summary of molecular networking metrics from selected data sets. Other factors that can impact discrepancies between observed and “true” annotation rates are the presence of chimeric MS/MS spectra derived from coeluting isobaric precursors, as well as ion adducts and in-source fragments. In the first case, chimeric MS/MS spectra contain mixed fragment ions from more than one precursor, lowering the spectral purity and making them difficult to match to any single library spectrum. In the second case, multiple ion species (e.g., adducts and in-source fragments) are counted as separate features, even though they arise from the same underlying molecule, artificially inflating feature counts without increasing the number of distinct metabolites. We assessed the rate of chimeric spectra between the different laboratories using the mzmine precursor purity checker. As the precursor isolation width was constant at 1  m / z  among the 15 aligned data sets, we observed a moderate differences in chimeric spectra rates, which average around 55.9%, ranging from 35.3%–77.0% ( Figure S14A ). Investigating the relationship between chromatographic peak height and precursor purity ( Figure S14A ), we observed a strong trend of increasing precursor purity for higher intensity features, which we attribute to highly abundant labile metabolites that stay on top of the refractory DOM background. Interestingly, those data sets that acquired fewer MS/MS spectra had higher average purity values (e.g., lab  m  and  n ), while laboratories with faster acquisition speed and deeper coverage contained more chimeric spectra. The only outlier was lab h, which showed the highest number of chimeric spectra, which we attribute to the lower chromatographic performance (see  Figure   B), likely due to the use of an HPLC column with 5 μm silica particles, in contrast to the sub-2 μm particle sizes employed by the other laboratories.   In this study, harmonized chromatography and DDA MS/MS settings were provided to all participating laboratories to achieve a high comparability. Nevertheless, six data sets (h, p, s, u, v, and w) were collected under diverging conditions due to limitations of certain instruments (e.g., low scan speed), user preferences (e.g., choice of chromatography system), and/or user errors (e.g., no dynamic exclusion). Consequently, these data sets contained low coverage of MS/MS events despite state-of-the-art instrumentation. In applications such as long-term environmental monitoring, regional surveys, or targeted ecosystem experiments, such incomplete MS/MS coverage could narrow the set of DOM components that can be reliably detected and interpreted and in turn limit the level of detail at which DOM composition and its variability can be resolved.   Metrics include the presence or absence (√/×) of internal standard annotation during ESI+ classical molecular networking (CMN), as well as the number of library ID matches, clustered features (clusters), networked nodes, singletons, and annotation rates obtained from both CMN and feature-based molecular networking (FBMN) of ESI+ and ESI- data. A full table including the results from all data sets is provided in the Supporting Information,  Table S5 . The color bar shows values ranging from low to high, which are calculated separately for each column of values.   Data sets that met the criterion of annotating 6 out of 8 standards (ESI+) showed a consistent pattern of tightly clustered MS/MS acquisition events from retention times of 3 to 10 min. Some of the excluded data sets (r, t, v, x) showed similar coverage but exhibited problems with either data conversion, inconsistent collision energy settings, insufficient mass accuracy, substantial retention time shifts compared to the other laboratories, or poor peak quality. For laboratory q, it appears that the DDA settings were not adequate to capture MS/MS spectra of the characteristic  m / z  400–600 ions, with MS/MS acquisition events focused on lower mass ions, which produced greater MS1 ion intensities for this instrument and dominated DDA precursor selection.   Laboratory w, which used a more recent instrument (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos), obtained excellent coverage of DOM material at the MS1 level but poor MS/MS coverage. In their case, dynamic exclusion was not activated, which caused repeated MS/MS acquisition around  m / z  200. Laboratories p and s exhibited very poor MS/MS coverage, attributable to inadequate DDA settings. The data from laboratory u were found to contain only a few MS/MS spectra covering the acquisition time range only sparsely because of the lower scan speed of the instrument.   When comparing retention times for the selected data sets through the spiked standards ( Figures   B and  S1–S8 ), moderate retention time differences (<1 min from center) were observed for the majority of laboratories, while for laboratories h, i, and m, larger retention time differences (3–4 min from center) were observed, which were attributable to deviations in the chromatographic gradient used. Laboratory h additionally showed broader chromatographic peaks, likely due to column choice (5 μm particle size compared to sub-2 μm for the other laboratories). The focus for acquiring comparable LC–MS/MS data should thus lie on standardized DDA (or DIA) MS/MS settings, as well as comparable chromatography columns and gradients. Feature Abundance Distribution across Laboratories   Following the initial data quality assessment, laboratories with at least six out of eight matched internal standards were selected for further analysis. To assess interlaboratory consistency and comparability, both CMN and FBMN methods were applied across the selected data sets. This approach also aimed at assessing whether MS1 and RT (FBMN) or MS/MS (CMN) alignment would better support data set comparability. FBMN provides a more accurate assessment of signal abundance trends but with a trade-off of risk of false alignment since no MS/MS matching is performed between separate samples, whereas CMN relies on matching of MS/MS signals, which can be negatively impacted by chimeric spectra and DDA subsampling bias. Furthermore, CMN provides less accurate quantitative information, as precursor intensities vary when MS/MS acquisition is triggered at different points in a chromatographic (MS1) peak. Therefore, when using CMN for data alignment, interlaboratory variability is confounded with variability introduced due to DDA subsampling bias and the imprecise precursor intensity during MS/MS triggering.   For FBMN analysis, an RT tolerance of 1.7 min was applied based on an inspection of RT deviations for the spiked standards, which were generally within this window except for laboratories h, i, and m ( Figure   B).   To evaluate the reproducibility of feature detection, we assessed the extent of feature overlap across the laboratories. When all features were considered, the presence/absence analysis showed that features detected in all laboratories were in the vast minority (1.0% of the features are shared between all laboratories in positive mode FBMN and 2.1% in CMN; 1.8% in negative mode FBMN and 0.2% in CMN ( Figures   A, S15A–S17A ). In the ‘top 1000’ highest intensity features, 4.7% are shared across all laboratories for FBMN and 3.0% for CMN ( Figures   B and  S16B , for negative mode, 4.3% in FBMN and 1% in CMN  Figures S16B and S17B ). Laboratories share only a small core set of strong, high-intensity signals, whereas the majority of weaker features are detected inconsistently and behave more like lab-specific noise when data sets are compared.   4.     Open in a new tab   Overview of shared and ubiquitous LC–MS/MS features across laboratories. LC–MS/MS (ESI+) data was analyzed with Feature-Based Molecular Networking (FBMN). (A) UpSet plot illustrating the distribution of shared features across laboratories when considering all detected features. (B) UpSet plot showing shared feature distributions across laboratories, restricted to the top 1000 most intense features (mean across samples). (C) Boxplot showing mean peak area as a function of the number of laboratories in which a feature is observed. (D) Cumulative count of features detected in all laboratories, plotted against the feature mean intensity rank of features considered. Both plots (C,D) indicated that most features shared between all data sets are also among the highest intensity features. Features that were shared between all laboratories were of higher average intensity for FBMN, with a trend toward lower average intensity for ‘rarer’ features ( Figures   C and  S16C ). For CMN, this trend was not readily observed, and the higher average intensities were observed from unique features, especially for the positive mode data (