>Materials and Methods   Plant Materials and Chemicals   All medicinal plants were obtained from Conba company (Zhejiang CONBA Pharmaceutical and Drug Research Development Corporation, Hangzhou 310052, Zhejiang, China) which purchased them to Jinhua City, China Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. The raw material quality was in accordance with the  Dictionary of Traditional Chinese Medicine  and the  Chinese Pharmacopoeia  according to the laws of the Chinese government. Plant names were verified with  www.theplantlist.org  on April 27, 2019 and are summarized in  Table 2 , which presents the codes used in this study. For the plant  Reynoutria japonica  Houtt., the synonym  Polygonum cuspidatum  was employed in the previous study ( Li et al., 2013 ) and was used here to avoid confusion.   Rosmarinic acid standard (≥98%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. (Darmstadt, Germany), ligustilide and isovitexin standards (98%) from Biopurify Phytochemicals Ltd. (Chengdu, China). Preparation of Extracts, Formula and Enriched Formula   Extracts of each single herbal drug and the mixture for the formula were prepared according to the proportions summarized in  Table 2  and employed in  Li et al. (2013) . The powders of single herbal drugs (10 g) were extracted in 250 ml of boiling water and formula (5 g) in 500 ml of boiling water. The extraction was done twice for 1 h in each case. After filtration, these decoctions were freeze-dried. The yields of extraction were of:  A. sinensis  61.8%,  C. indicum  36.7%,  G. uralensis  26.7%,  I. tinctoria  36.5%,  O. diffusa  12.2%,  P. cuspidatum  15.9%,  P. vulgaris  7.8%,  S. baicalensis  55.3%,  S. glabra  22.1%,  S. flavescens , 28.9% and of 13.7% for the formula (w/w).   The polar compounds of the prepared formula were removed by C18 solid phase extraction (SPE 1,000 mg/12 ml, Finisterre, Teknokroma, Barcelona, Spain). 100 mg of formula solubilized in distilled water were introduced in the cartridge. 10 ml of water was used to obtain an aqueous fraction and 25 ml of methanol (Fisher Scientific, Bishop, United Kingdom) eluted the retained metabolites. After drying, the yields were 65.9% ± 2.8% (w/w) for the aqueous fraction and 17.5% ± 1.2% (w/w) for the methanolic fraction. The loss was 16.5% ± 3.1% (w/w).   For marker purification, a methanolic extract has been prepared to obtain a more enriched extract in secondary metabolites than the decoction. It was obtained from the powdered mixture (200 g) by maceration (eight times 24 h in 5 L) and evaporated, giving a yield of 18.0% (w/w). This methanolic extract was subsequently fractionated into two fractions by Vacuum Liquid Chromatography (VLC) on a RP Zeoprep 60 C18 15–25 µm (Zeochem ®  Silicagel, Rüti, Switzerland). After equilibration with water, 3 g of extract mixed with the solid phase (1:6) was deposited and eluted with 0.6 L of water and then by 1 L of methanol. The extraction yield was 29.7% (w/w) for the aqueous fraction and 43.4% (w/w) for the methanolic fraction. Metabolite Profiling   Preliminary Profiles   The formula was solubilized in a solution of water and methanol (7:3), whereas the enriched extract was in water and methanol (2:8), at a concentration of 5 mg/ml for UHPLC-UV-PDA-ELSD and 1 mg/ml for UHPLC-HRMS-TOF. The solutions were sonicated (15 min) and centrifuged (10 min, 6,000 rpm) (Prism R, Labnet international, Inc., Edison, NJ, United States).   Preliminary profiles, were acquired on two independent Waters Acquity UPLC systems (Waters, Milford, MA, United States), the first equipped with a Waters Micromass LCT Premier Time-Of-Flight (TOF) mass spectrometer (Waters) with an electrospray interface (ESI) and the second with UV-PDA and ELSD detections. Chromatographic systems and TOF parameters were set as previously published ( Eugster et al., 2014 ). The second system was controlled by Empower Software v2.0, its UV-PDA acquired from 200 to 500 nm (1.2 nm of resolution) and ELSD Sedex 85 (Sedere LT-ELSD, Alfortville, France) was set at 45°C with a gain of 8. Chromatographic traces were exported from the proprietary format to text files to be plotted on Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, Inc.) ( Figure 2 ). Optimized Profiles   In addition to the formula, freeze-dried extracts of single herbs were prepared as above (Section  Preliminary Profiles ). Optimized profiles were acquired on two independent UHPLC systems, one equipped with three in-line detections (UV-PDA, ELSD and single quadrupole) (UHPLC-UV-PDA-QMS-ELSD) and the second with HRMS/MS.   The chromatographic conditions were the same for both systems: samples were injected (2 µL) into an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 µm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm; Waters) and eluted (0.4 ml/min, 40°C) with water (A) and acetonitrile (B), both containing 0.1% formic acid with the following gradient: from 15 to 75% of B from 0 to 11 min (curve 7), 75–98% from 11 to 12 min, an isocratic step at 98% for 2 min and a re-equilibration step of 2 min. Three-Detector System   Data Acquisition   A system coupling UV-PDA detection, a single quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) and ELSD provided all three detections with the same pump system and thus achieved stably aligned retention times. This UHPLC-UV-PDA-QMS-ELSD system allowed the data from the three detections to be efficiently linked, and in addition, to verify via the QMS the ELSD attributions performed on the UHPLC-HRMS/MS data.   The formula, the enriched formula and the 10 single herb extracts were acquired on this three-detector system. This three-detector system, controlled by MassLynx ®  V4.2 (Waters), was equipped with an Acquity UPLC system (Waters), which included a binary pumping system, an auto-sampler (set at 10°C), a column manager with a pre-column heater (set at 40°C), a PDA detector and an isocratic solvent manager which directed 10% of the flow to the single quadrupole (Acquity QDA, Waters) while adding a flow of 200 μL/min of water-acetonitrile (1:1) containing 0.1% formic acid. The remaining 90% of the flow was directed to an ELSD (Büchi ELS Detector C-650), set at 45°C, gain 8. The QDA, equipped with an ESI source, was set as follows in both modes: probe temperature 600°C, ESI capillary voltage 1.2 kV, cone voltage 15 V, source temperature 120°C, acquisition range 30–1,250 Da. In this setting, the greater sensitivity of the simple quadrupole allows to obtain relevant signals on the 10% of the flow coming from the column. The isocratic pump increases the flow to ensure adequate ionization by the ESI. Evaporative Light Scattering Detection Data Treatment   The ELSD traces of each herb were integrated with MassLynx ®  V4.2 (Waters) and only ELSD areas equal to or greater than 0.004 μV/s were considered. A table containing UV max and MS data was prepared in order to be compared with the HRMS data presented below. To visually compare the 10 herbs in an informative graphical representation, ELSD areas of each herb were represented using Prism software as a bar plot in a superimposed manner, each color representing an herb ( Figures 5C ,D and  Supplementary Figures 2C,D ). Two area scales were chosen to illustrate the herbs with the most intense peaks (area from 0.0 to 0.4 μV/s) ( G. uralensis ,  P. cuspidatum ,  S. flavescens , and  S. baicalensis  ( Figure 5C ) and the herbs with less intense peaks (areas from 0.00 to 0.008 μV/s ( Figure 5D ) ( C. indicum ,  I. tinctoria ,  O. diffusa ,  P. vulgaris ,  S. glabra ). The peak areas were labeled by a letter according to their source herb and by a number in order of importance of their area, from the largest to the smallest. A total of 47 ELSD peaks were detected. The numbers of ELSD peaks for each herb were of seven for  C. indicum , nine for  G. uralensis , two for  I. tinctoria , eight for  O. diffusa , four for  P. cuspidatum , five for  P. vulgaris,  one for  S. glabra , ten for  S. baicalensis , and one for  S. flavescens . No ELSD peak was detected for  A. sinensis . Peaks not retained under RP chromatographic conditions were not considered. High Resolution Spectrometry Analysis   The analyses were performed on an Acquity UPLC system interfaced to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Focus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a heated electrospray ionization source (HESI-II) and an Acquity UPLC PDA detector. Thermo Scientific Xcalibur 2.1 software was employed for instrument control. The detailed conditions are presented in  Supplementary Section S9 .   High Resolution Spectra Data Processing     ThermoRAW  MS data were converted to . mzXML  using ProteoWizzard ( Kessner et al., 2008 ) and loaded to MZmine 2.37 ( Pluskal et al., 2010 ;  Pluskal et al., 2012 ). To prepare the peak lists, the ADAP workflow was employed ( Myers et al., 2017 ), followed by a deisotoping step and an alignment step ( Supplementary Section S10  for the precise parameters). The parameters were based on those previously used in our laboratory for single herb profiling ( Barthelemy et al., 2019 ;  Rutz et al., 2019 ), and no specific adaptation to a multi-herb extract has been made. Finally, the peak lists were filtered to keep only peaks with HRMS/MS scan. The HRMS level, which contained the peak height and retention time data of each feature was exported to a text file, whereas the HRMS/MS level was exported as an . mgf  file to be submitted to the online workflow at GNPS ( Wang et al., 2016a ). Feature-Based Molecular Network   Molecular network (MN) were created where edges were filtered to have a cosine score above 0.7 and more than six matched peaks. Further edges between two nodes were kept in the network if and only if each of the nodes appeared in each other’s respective top 50 most similar nodes. Tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set at 0.02 Da. The spectra in the network were then searched against GNPS spectral libraries. All matches kept between network spectra and library spectra were required to have a score above 0.7 and at least six matched peaks. The GNPS job parameters are available at  https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=4cffb19303354a6a814184facb930bc0  (PI) and  https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=b949d909e6484ed6b6b28db4c09109ac  (NI).   The next step was to compare the experimental spectra organized in the MN against an in-house  in silico Database  (ISDB-DNP) prepared from the Dictionary of the Natural Products ( DNP, 2019 ), according to a previously reported workflow ( Allard et al., 2016 ). To do this, the  .mgf  file from GNPS and the  .tsv  file containing the database matches from GNPS were used. A top six consultation was employed for annotating the peaks at a tolerance of 0.005 Da and a cosinus score threshold of 0.2. FBMNs were visualized with Cytoscape 3.7.0 ( Figure 3B  and  Supplementary Figure S1B ), and annotations were displayed thanks to the Chem Viz2 1.1.0. Tables from HRMS data, GNPS library and ISDB-DNP consultations were loaded in Cytoscape. Node and Cluster Specificity   The table gathering all information in Cytoscape was then re-exported in a text file to be evaluated by an in-house Jupyter Notebook script in terms of nodes and clusters herb-specificity ( Supplementary Figure S4 ). The Jupyter Notebook and the corresponding python script are available on gitlab:  https://gitlab.unige.ch/Arnaud.Gaudry/node_treater . The data loaded into the script combined the MS data obtained after the alignment of the features (called the quantification table in GNPS terminology, which contained for each aligned feature its  m / z , retention time and peak height(s)), with the information related to clusters (cluster numbers, called  component indexes  in GNPS terminology). First, at the node level, the relative intensity of each feature detected in the 10 herbs was calculated, allowing the description of each node in terms of contribution of each herb, referred to as a  specificity percentage . The lists of aligned features were then reduced to features detected in the formula (deletion of the features detected in herbs but not in the formula, as well as in the blank analyses). A threshold of 90% was applied to retrieve the specific features in an individual herb extract. The number of features specific to one herb was then counted. At the cluster level, the averages of these specificity percentages were calculated, allowing the description of each cluster according to the contribution of the 10 herbs. This percentage was named the  cluster specificity percentage . Furthermore, this in-house script could export the HRMS data ( m / z , retention time and peak height) for a specific cluster, to facilitate the link between the FBMN and the metabolite profiles. The HRMS data exported by this script were then represented against the chromatogram in the form of a bar plot with Prism 8 software ( Figures 7 ,  8  and  Supplementary Section S8 ), referred to as  bar chromatograms . For the clarity of some bar chromatograms, features with the same retention time within a given cluster were deleted to avoid representing in-source features (adducts, complexes and/or fragments). Visualization in the Feature-Based Molecular Network   To visualize the contribution of each herb to the formula, the height values of the deconvoluted peaks were represented on the nodes in two layers (legend  Figure 4 ). In the center of the node, a pie chart represented the formula (pale pink) and the blank analyses (white). On the external part of the node, an external ring represented the peak heights of the feature in the single herb extracts. The node size mapped the feature heights in the formula. 2D Feature Maps   The aligned table obtained previously thanks to the in-house script was exported to a  .csv  file and loaded in Microsoft Excel 16.16.8. To prepare the 2D feature map, the feature height intensities in the formula have been assigned to the features specifically detected in one herb. Features detected below the threshold of 90% were not attributed to a given herb. This feature list was plotted as a scatter plot (arbitrary plot size for  Figure 3A  and proportional to peak height intensity in  Figure 5A  in PI;  Supplementary Section S1  for NI). Features found in the formula were plotted as black circles, whereas aligned features from each herb were plotted as dots according to a color code representing each herb. Thus, a specific aligned feature was visible as a black circle surrounding a colored dot. Finally, ELSD peak areas from the single herb extract (Sections  Evaporative Light Scattering Detection data Treatment  and  Annotation Strategy ) were manually assigned to the specific features in an additional column in the aligned table. After this manual assignment, the same plot was prepared with the attributed ELSD areas ( Figure 5E ). Annotation Strategy   The annotation strategy combined ELSD filtering, interpretation of MS, HRMS, HRMS/MS and UV-PDA spectra with chemotaxonomy information. ELSD filtering retrieved 47 peaks (Section  Evaporative Light Scattering Detection Data Treatment ). The MS data were interpreted in parallel in both modes. First, in regard to ELSD peaks, the corresponding nominal  m / z  were retrieved in the QMS traces (Section  Three Detector System ). These  m / z  were then searched in the peak lists obtained by processing the UHPLC-HRMS/MS metabolite profiles (Section  Data Acquisition ). The specificity of the peaks highlighted by ELSD was verified. The molecular formula of the specific peaks was then calculated and searched in the DNP ( DNP, 2019 ). The number of potential structures were recovered for the species, genus, family, if previously described. These taxonomic data were then compared with the annotation obtained on HRMS/MS data by consultation of the theoretical  in silico  MS/MS spectral database (Section  Feature-Based Molecular Network ). This annotation workflow is presented with more details in  Supplementary Section S5 . The annotation results are summarized in  Supplementary Tables S2–S11  and all associated metadata are available in the Cytoscape files in  doi:10.25345/C5516P  including IUPAC name and InChI key. Isolation of the Markers   In order to rapidly isolate the makers, a fractionation at high-scale on Medium Liquid Chromatography (MPLC) was implemented. A gradient optimization was performed at High Pressure Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) scale before its transfer to MPLC (Büchi). The enriched extract was separated thanks to a HPLC system (Agilent Technologies 1260 Infinity), controlled with the software Chemstation for LC3D (Agilent Technologies), equipped with UV-PDA detection and ELSD (Sedex LT-ELSD 85 (Sedere, Oliver, France)). A Zeoprep ®  column (A60 C18, 250 mm × 4.6 mm i.d., 15–25 mm, Zeochem) was used at a flow of 1 ml/min of water (A) and methanol (B) both with 0.1% of formic acid (Fisher Scientific, Bishop, United Kingdom). The optimized gradient was from 20 to 73% of B in 60 min, and then 73–100% in 20 min. Gradient transfer calculation ( Challal et al., 2015 ) indicated the following MPLC conditions: 37 min of isocratic step at 20% of B, 747 min from 20 to 73% and 257 min from 73 to 100%, for a total of 19h30 of separation at a flow of 15 ml/min. The MPLC column (460 mm × 49 mm i.d.) was packed with the same solid phase as at HPLC scale. The enriched extract (7 g) (Section  Preparation of Extracts, Formula and Enriched Formula ) was introduced in MPLC by a dry load cell ( Challal et al., 2015 ) and fractionated into 50 fractions. In order to monitor the MS features associated to the marker highlighted by the annotation strategy of the formula, all fractions and the enriched extract were checked in short chromatographic conditions with the same systems used for preliminary profiling (Section  Preliminary Profiles ), on one hand with UHPLC-UV-PDA-ELSD detection and on the other by UHPLC-HRMS-TOF, set as described in ( Brillatz et al., 2018 ). HRMS data were converted to . cdf  format through Databridge provided by MassLynx and loaded to MZmine. An aligned peak list was prepared as previously described, with specific parameters summarized in  Supplementary Section S10 . Annotated markers ( Supplementary Tables S2–S11 ) were searched in the aligned table through their  m / z  in order to detect in which fraction(s) they were located. The ELSD traces of each fraction of interest were evaluated to verify the purity of the markers prior NMR analysis. Thus, seven targeted markers were identified directly in the MPLC fractions. Fraction M21 (82 mg) contained C2, fraction M34 (77 mg) and M35 (44 mg) contained mainly G1, fraction M31 (83 mg) mainly PO2, fraction 13 (199 mg) mainly SC1, fraction M25 (71 mg) mainly SC2, fraction M17 (83 mg) contained SM1. The  1 H and  13 C-NMR signal assignments are presented in  Supplementary Section S5 . The MS/MS spectra corresponding to these components in both ionization modes have been added to the GNPS library to be shared with the community. Semi-Preparative Purification   To isolate targeted compounds that were not obtained in sufficient purity in the MPLC fractions, semi-preparatory purifications were performed from the MPLC fractions. First the chromatographic conditions were optimized at the HPLC analytical scale in the same system described in Section  Isolation of the Markers , on an X-bridge C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm i.d., 5 µm) (Waters) equipped with a pre-column cartridge holder (20 × 4.6 i.d., Waters). The flow was set at 1 ml/min of water and methanol both with 0.1% of formic acid. The optimized LC conditions at the analytical level were geometrically transferred to semi-preparative scale ( Guillarme et al., 2007 ;  Guillarme et al., 2008 ;  Challal et al., 2015 ). Semi-preparative HPLC was performed on an ARMEN Spot Prep System (Saint-Avé, France), with an X-bridge Prep C18 OBD column (250 mm × 19 mm i.d., 5 µm) (Waters) equipped with a UV detector and an ELSD Sedex 55 (Sedere). The flow rate was set at 17 ml/min. Fraction M6 yielded C1 (1.1 mg) (30% of methanol), fraction M23 yielded C4 (2.3 mg) and SC3 (1.0 mg) (40% of methanol). Fraction M14 yielded SO1 (2.9 mg) (1% of methanol) and PO1 (1.5 mg) (gradient from 2 to 50% of methanol in 30 min). Fraction M20 yielded O1 (8.5 mg) and SC1 (8.1 mg) (gradient from 45 to 75% of methanol in 30 min). Fraction M15 yielded G2 (8.3 mg) (gradient from 10 to 100% of methanol in 30 min). The  1 H and  13 C-NMR signal assignments are presented in  Supplementary Section S5 . Spiking Experiments   To confirm the annotations of  A1 ,  I1  and  PR1 , the retention time and spectra of the standards were compared with those observed in the corresponding herb extracts ( A. sinensis ,  I. tinctoria  and  P. vulgaris ) with the methods described in Sections  Optimized Profiles  and  Data Acquisition  (UHPLC-UV-PDA-QMS-ELSD). Spiking experiments were also performed (data not shown). Characterization of Isolated Constituents   NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance III HD 600 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a CQI 5 mm Cryoprobe and a SampleJet automated sample changer (Bruker BioSpin). Chemical shift were reported in parts per million (δ) using the deuterated dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO-d6) signal (δ h  2.50; δ c  39.5) as internal standards for  1 H and  13 C NMR, respectively, and coupling constants (J) were reported in hertz. Assignments were obtained based on two-dimensional (2D) NMR experiments (COSY, NOESY, HSQC and HMBC) ( Supplementary Section S7  for the precise descriptions). Conclusion   This untargeted exploratory study provided a comprehensive characterization of the chemical composition of a complex TCM formula to study the specific contribution of each herb to the formula and to select quality control markers. It exemplified how metabolomics data can help to perceive the chemical contribution of each single herb to the final formula. The data-driven workflow proposed in this study for a given formula is innovative and could be used to investigate other TCM formulae in view of selecting specific markers and sub-markers. As discussed, the proposed method is certainly not to be used for a regular routine control, but it shows how far herb contribution can be monitored with state-of-the-art method in the field. Such analysis produces highly informative compositional data on representative batches, that can be used as a reference for designing appropriate and simpler quality control methods.   The extensive use of FBMN for quality control purposes needs to be evaluated in more detail. For this, methods should be developed to compare formulae, to evaluate and quantify their composition consistency in an automated and generic manner. This mainly required dedicated software development since data acquisition is ensured by most state-of-the-art available platforms. With the rapid spread of molecular networking in many fields of plant analysis, integration of high-quality data with innovative automated methods and comprehensive natural products databases is expected and might be adopted in future by authorities and TCM producers. Data Availability Statement   The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below:  https://massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/dataset.jsp?task=a8219bbd768944e99257486adc672003 , MassIVE MSV000085648. Author Contributions   JH designed and conceived the study, performed the experiments and interpreted the data, wrote the manuscript and created the figures. P-MA designed the HRMS/MS data interpretation and revised the manuscript. EQ designed the fractionation experiments and revised the manuscript. LM interpreted the NMR analyses of all isolated compounds. AG created the Jupyter notebook script to interpret HRMS and HRMS/MS data and revised the manuscript. LV performed part of the experiments of extraction and isolation. SL and RW developed the multi-herb formula. KK provided the multi-herb formula, was consulted during study design and revised the manuscript. J-LW conceived and designed the study, the experiments and the figures, wrote and revised the manuscript. Conflict of Interest   The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Acknowledgments   The author JH would like to thank Adriano Rutz (Wolfender’s research laboratory) for informal and constructive discussion concerning quality control during the project. The work in Göttingen is supported by the “Förderkreis der Forschungsstelle für Fernöstliche Medizin.