>Material and Methods   In this study, we established a novel workflow for the extraction and analysis of  holo -hydroxamate siderophores. Ferrioxamine ( Fe-1 ) was used as a model compound to benchmark the extraction performances of the following resins: C-18, Hydrophilic Lipophilic Balance (HLB), and Amberlite XAD. Based on the results, an optimized workflow was developed and applied to investigate siderophores produced by the fish pathogen  Tenacibaculum maritimum  LSP9.1 grown under iron-deficient conditions.   Microbial cultures were treated with GaBr 3  to chelate and stabilize the siderophores. After centrifugation and filtration, siderophores from both the cell-free supernatant and the methanolic extract of the cell pellet were extracted using XAD-7 resin. The extracted metabolites were analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS, studied by feature-based molecular networking (FBMN), and validated via direct infusion - ion mobility spectrometry coupled to mass spectrometry (DI-IMS-MS).   A detailed description of materials and reagents,  Fe-1  synthesis and calibration curve, SPE protocols, bacterial culture conditions,  holo -hydroxamate siderophore extraction, LC–MS/MS paramethers, FBMN anlaysis, and DI-IMS-MS validation are provided in the  Supporting Information 1 . Results and Discussion   Optimization of  Holo- Hydroxamate Siderophore Extraction   Effective extraction of  holo -hydroxamate siderophores requires sorbents that fulfill two essential criteria: (1) sufficient affinity for the analyte to ensure its retention, and (2) a reversible interaction between the sorbent and the analyte to obtain high recovery percentages. Therefore, we evaluated three of the most common nonionic and nonpolar sorbents used in natural products and siderophore studies: C-18 cartridges, HLB cartridges, and Amberlite XAD resins using ferrioxamine ( Fe-1 ) recoveries as a benchmark. UV–vis spectroscopy of  Fe-1  showed a characteristic maximum at 429 nm, which was used for quantification ( Figure S1C ). The absorption maxima of the UV–vis spectra of  1  and the Fe­(acac) 3  salt, were also recorded to rule out possible interferences in  Fe-1  detection ( Figure S1C ). A calibration curve at 429 nm in the concentration range of 25–500 μM of  Fe-1  yielded an extinction coefficient of ε = 2160 ± 5.1 L mol –1  cm –1 , which was consistent with previously reported coefficients for this complex ( Figure S1D ).  ,      C-18 and HLB sorbents are commonly used for the extraction and separation of organic compounds from aqueous environments. To test their affinity for  holo- hydroxamate siderophores, 0.75 mmol of  Fe-1  were loaded onto each cartridge and eluted with a step-elution of aqueous methanol (0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%,  Figure   ). Surprisingly, both sorbents exhibited strong interaction with the analyte.  Fe-1  was detected throughout all the collected fractions with maximum analyte recoveries of 18% and 19% per fraction in C-18 and HLB cartridges, respectively ( Figure   A and B). C-18 cartridges also failed to efficiently retain the analyte, with 28% of  Fe-1  lost during loading ( Figure   A). Contrarily,  Fe-1  was not detected in the nonretained fraction when using HLB cartridges ( Figure   B).   1.     Open in a new tab   Recovery percentages of  Fe-1  from the different fractions obtained by SPE using C-18 cartridge ( A ), HLB cartridge ( B ), or nonionic Amberlite XAD resins ( C ). Previous studies presented C-18 cartridges as the standard methodology for the isolation of organic-metal complexes in aqueous samples;  ,−      however, they consistently recovered low yields, typically ranging between 10 and 30%.  ,,,   The limited recoveries of the C-18 cartridges have been attributed to the presence of free silanol groups in this stationary phase, which strongly interact with metals.  ,   The metallic complexes can be retained even after elution with 100% organic mobile phase, requiring the addition of acid, e.g. 0.5% HNO 3,  to be eluted. Previous studies showing the interaction between metallic complexes and C-18 sorbents are consistent with our findings.  ,      HLB cartridges displayed slightly better extraction performances than C-18 and were able to efficiently retain  Fe-1  ( Figure   B). However, the cartridges still failed to concentrate the analyte into a single fraction, instead distributing  Fe-1  across multiple fractions with yields ranging from 12 to 19% ( Figure   B). This contrasts the effectiveness of HLB cartridges for the extraction of catecholate/phenolate siderophores, probably due to π-π stacking interactions facilitated by vinylpyrrolidone (hydrophilic) and divinylbenzene (lipophilic) groups that interact with the aromatic functionalities of catecholate/phenolate siderophores.  ,,   In contrast, HLB cartridges appear to be less suitable for hydroxamate-type siderophores, which lack such aromatic functionalities.   Amberlite XAD resins (XAD-2, XAD-4, XAD-7, and XAD-16) were evaluated by incubating a 150 μM  Fe-1  solution with 10 mL of resin overnight, followed by MeOH desorption. The tested Amberlite XAD proved to be highly effective for the extraction of the  holo- hydroxamate siderophore  Fe-1 , with recoveries ranging from 65 to 74% ( Figure   C). Among these resins, XAD-7 exhibited the highest recovery (74%). Hydrophobic XAD resins have been widely used for the extraction of  apo -hydroxamate siderophores, where retention is primarily driven by hydrophobic interactions between resins and  apo -hydroxamic siderophores.  ,−     However, upon complexation with the metal core, the polarity of the siderophore increases. XAD-2, XAD-4, and XAD-16 are highly hydrophobic styrene-divinylbenzene copolymers with varying pore sizes, whereas XAD-7, a cross-linked acrylic ester, is the only “moderately polar” resin. This difference in polarity may account for the superior performance of XAD-7 in extracting  holo -siderophores.    In summary, C-18 and HLB sorbents showed high interaction and low recoveries during elution for the  holo -hydroxamate siderophore. In contrast, XAD-7 resin provided a gentle and more effective method for extracting these compounds from aqueous samples. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic comparison of extraction strategies specifically for  holo -hydroxamate siderophores. Detection and Identification of  Holo -Hydroxamate Siderophores via XAD-LC/MS-FBMN-IMS   After the optimization of the extraction method, we established a robust workflow for the accurate detection and identification of  holo -metallophores in XAD-7 extracts. This workflow is divided in the following steps:   1. Untargeted HPLC-MS/MS and Feature-Based Molecular Networking (FBMN) Analysis   Untargeted HPLC-MS/MS analysis of the XAD-7 extracts provides a comprehensive snapshot of the bacterial metabolome. Each compound exhibits a unique MS/MS fragmentation pattern, facilitating partial structural characterization and identification of structural similarities among metabolites.  ,   After preprocessing the precursor ions based on various features (isotope patterns, retention time, and even ion mobility separation) in MZmine, the data is submitted to the Global Natural Product Social (GNPS) platform for Feature-Based Molecular Networking (FBMN), which organizes the MS/MS spectra into networks based on spectral similarity and dereplicates ions against reported compound spectra. This approach facilitates the identification of metabolites and provides a visual representation of the entire metabolome within the analyzed sample.  −      2.   69/71 Ga and  54/56 Fe Isotopologue Screening for Potential  Holo -Siderophores in the Generated Networks   The distinctive isotopic patterns of gallium ( M   r  = 69, 71; ratio 3:2) and iron ( M   r  = 54, 56, 57, 58; ratio 6:92:2:0.3) are easily recognizable in mass spectrometry. The addition of their salts to the sample facilitates their detection in MS by forming their corresponding metal complexes while stabilizing the analyte. There are several open-source tools available that can aid the isotopologues search, including the ‘isotope peak scanner’ function in MZmine, or the CAMERA package in R, which can annotate isotopic patterns and metal-specific adducts when combined with XCMS for peak detection and alignment.  3. Prediction of Molecular Formulas by SIRIUS   The chemical formulas of the detected isotopologues and their fragmentation pattern are then predicted with the open-source software SIRIUS 5.8.3. This information enables the dereplication of the data against different databases to provide putative annotations. 4. Manual Ion Identity (MII) Layer for Data Simplification   The metal-binding properties of siderophores lead to the formation of multiple ion species and adducts, often with distinct retention times and MS 2  fragmentation patterns in HPLC-MS/MS analysis. Consequently, adducts (e.g., [M + H] + , [M + Na] + , [M + K] + ) from the same metabolite may be distributed across multiple molecular families rather than clustering together within a single network. This dispersion complicates comprehensive annotation and interpretation, hindering accurate metabolome characterization.   Several computational tools have attempted to address this issue, typically using retention time filtering and the correlation of feature intensities across spectra. These methods are poorly suited for metallophore analysis where metal-adduct forms (e.g., Fe 3+ - and Ga 3+ ) may not coelute or exhibit consistent intensity correlations.  −     Recently, Dorrestein and co-workers introduced ion identity molecular networking (IIMN), which relies on the presence of unbound  apo- forms of ionophores to establish ion relationships (e.g., adducts, charge states, neutral losses) via MS 1 -based mass differences. Since most of the siderophores are present in their  holo -forms after metal-chelation of extracts, direct application of this computational tool is challenging.   To overcome these challenges, a manual ion identity (MII) curation step was implemented to refine the network. Chemical formula predictions and MS 1  isotopic patterns were inspected to manually identify and group ions corresponding to different adducts of the same compound (Supplementary data 2). As a result, otherwise disconnected nodes across the molecular network were linked, reducing redundancy and improving interpretability. 5. Data Validation by Direct-Infusion Ion Mobility Spectrometry–Mass Spectrometry (DI-IMS-MS)   HPLC-MS/MS data used for FBMN studies generally uses reverse-phase sorbents for sample analysis. However, we observed that  holo -hydroxamate siderophores strongly interact with these sorbents, and may form artifacts, compromising the integrity of the results. To address this, we propose the use of direct-infusion ion mobility spectrometry coupled to mass spectrometry (DI-IMS-MS) as an orthogonal layer of validation and annotation to FBMN.   IMS offers a mild, rapid (millisecond time scale), and sensitive separation of ions that provides valuable information about the composition of complex mixtures without the use of other separation techniques. Interestingly, IMS can be coupled to different detection methods such as MS that increases its value and usefulness. Ion mobility also provides specific features of each precursor ion, such as drifting time, arrival time or collision cross section (CCS) that could be potentially used as features for refining the data in FBMN. In the present study, we validated the data based on exact mass and  54/56 Fe or  69/71 Ga isotopologues pattern. The nodes detected via IMS were then dereplicated against different databases based on their proposed chemical formulas. To our knowledge, this study represents the first application of IMS-MS as a data validation tool for FBMN analyses. 6. Putative Siderophore Structure Elucidation Based on MS/MS Fragmentation   Structural characterization of validated  holo -siderophores was performed through careful interpretation of MS/MS fragmentation spectra. Fragmentation trees generated via SIRIUS can provide preliminary insights into substructural motifs and diagnostic neutral losses. However, the results must be considered with caution, as we observed that the program often fails to generate correct fragment annotations for metal complexes. Although NMR elucidation is usually preferred, the interaction of  holo -hydroxamic siderophores with reverse-phase supports and complex bacterial production of highly similar analogs hinder its use. Thus, inferred structures are proposed here based on recurring fragmentation patterns, metal-retaining fragment ions, and complementary literature data.   Overall, this systematic multistep approach ( Figure   ) not only serves for the identification of new siderophores but also improves our understanding of their chemical diversity and the underlying mechanisms of iron chelation.   2.     Open in a new tab   Schematic flowchart representation of the XAD-LC/MS-FBMN-IMS strategy for the analysis of  holo- metallophores. Application of the XAD-LC/MS-FBMN-IMS Strategy to Unveil the Siderome of  Tenacibaculum maritimum     The XAD-LC/MS-FBMN-IMS strategy ( Figure   ) was evaluated for the detection and identification of the siderophores from  Tenacibaculum maritimum  LSP9.1, a strain isolated from a tenacibaculosis outbreak in cultured sole ( Solea senegalensis ) in Spain.     Tenacibaculum maritimum  is the causative agent of tenacibaculosis, an ulcerative infection with lack of host specificity that severely impacts the aquaculture industry worldwide.  ,   Recent genomic studies of this bacterium showed the presence of iron uptake systems mediated by hydroxamate siderophores as putative virulence mechanisms.  −    Notably, the detected biosynthetic gene cluster (BGC) displayed high homology for the  mbs  locus, which has been proposed to encode hydroxamic bisucaberin and desferrioxamine-like compounds. Despite the significance of  T. maritimum  as a fish pathogen in aquaculture, no studies have characterized its siderome.   To enhance the production of siderophores,  T. maritimum  LSP9.1 strain was grown in minimal medium supplemented with the chelating agent EDDHA. The presence of siderophores was confirmed by the appearance of a yellow halo around the colonies on CAS agar. However, manipulation of the culture (e.g., centrifugation) resulted in decreased CAS value, denoting unstable siderophores.   Therefore, iron-deficient cultures of  T. maritimum  LSP9.1 were treated with GaBr 3  to stabilize the siderophores. The cell-free supernatant and cell pellet were then extracted with XAD-7 resin to afford the CAS-active extracts TMSX7M and TMPX7M, respectively. These extracts, along with the standard  Ga-1 , were subjected to HPLC-MS/MS. Acidic conditions were strictly avoided to prevent degradation and dechelation of the siderophores during separation. The limit of detection (LOD) of this analysis for  Fe-1  used as a standard for  holo -hydroxamate siderophores and tested over the range of 62.5 to 1.95 μg/mL was 7.8 μg/mL. As expected, strong interaction of  Fe-1  with the RP column was observed, resulting in the detection of the complex across the entire run rather than as a distinct peak and preventing a gradual decrease in signal intensity between dilutions.   The HPLC-MS/MS data of both extracts and  Ga-1  were analyzed by FBMN ( Figure S2, Tables S1 and S2 ). The search for  69/71 Ga and  54/56 Fe isotopologues revealed seven subnetworks comprising a total of 122 precursor ions putatively associated with metal-complexes ( Figure    and  Supporting Information 2 ). The MII layer, based on chemical formulas predicted with SIRIUS, reduced the number of chelating compounds to 45 ( Supporting Information 2 ). Interestingly, aluminum and iron complexes were also detected, despite not being intentionally introduced, which were annotated based on isotopic patterns and exact masses ( Supporting Information 2 ). DI-IMS-MS analysis of TM S X7M and TM P X7M extracts validated only 20 out of the 45 metal complexes detected by FBMN ( Figure S3–S21 ). The sensitivity of DI-IMS-MS was also measured in terms of  Fe-1  concentration detecting the LOD at 7.9 pg/mL, which denotes a high sensitivity for our compounds and outcompetes the LOD displayed by HPLC-MS/MS.   3.     Open in a new tab   Feature-Based Molecular Networking of  Tenacibaculum maritimum  putative siderome extracted from the cell-free supernatant (blue node color) and cell pellet (green node color) and  Ga-1  and  Fe-1  used as standards (orange nodes). MS/MS analysis revealed three main families: ( A )  N -acetylated terminal siderophores ( M-1  signifies metal-chelated desferoxamine), ( B ) hydroxamic acid-terminal siderophores, and ( C )  N -succinic acid terminal siderophores. Each precursor ion is represented as a circle (node), connected to structurally similar precursors by gray connectors (edges) based on cosine similarity. Edge thickness corresponds to the cosine score, with thicker lines indicating higher structural similarity. Node radius reflects the summed precursor ion intensity, providing a semiquantitative view of siderophore abundance. Pie charts within each node indicate the relative distribution between the pellet (green) and supernatant (blue). To elucidate their structures, we first examined the MS/MS fragmentation pattern of  Ga-1 . The MS 2  fragmentation of this  holo -hydroxamate siderophore can be rationalized by remote hydrogen rearrangements (RHR) ( Figure S22 ), which confirmed the presence of the characteristic  N -hydroxy- N -succinyl-cadaverine (HSC) units ( Figure S22 ). Specifically, the fragmentation sequence begins with a neutral loss of water (fragment  a ), followed by cleavage of the  C -terminal cadaverine unit (fragment  b ), then the loss of the  N -terminal acetyl group (fragment  c ) and a succinyl moiety (fragment  d ). Finally, another cadaverine unit is released from the metal complex (fragment  b ), while the metal core remains intact throughout the process ( Figure S22 ).   Analysis of the MS/MS fragmentation patterns of the 20 metal complexes revealed a common core structure with  Ga-1,  displaying  N -hydroxy- N -acyl cadaverine (HAC) and HSC units, indicative of desferrioxamine-like structures. Variations included the presence of a hydroxamic acid functionality at one end or additional HSC units that enabled their classification into three distinct series (families) ( Figure   ). Within each family, differences were found in the length and degree of unsaturation of the fatty acid tail in the HAC unit.   The first family of compounds is characterized by the presence of a second HSC unit, of which one is acetylated. This series is distributed across subnetworks 1, 2, and 3 ( Figure   A). Chemical formula dereplication allowed for the annotation of desferrioxamine D1 ( 2 ) and two previously reported siderophores from two  Streptomyces  species, C4 acyl desferrioxamine-D (C4 acyl DFO–D,  3 ) and C5 acyl desferrioxamine-D (C5 acyl DFO–D,  4 ) (referred in the original report as  N -butyryldesferrioxamine B).  ,   Additionally, the putative structures of five new desferrioxamine D-like siderophores, compounds  5 - 9 , within this family were proposed based on their MS/MS fragmentation patterns and comparison to that of ferrioxamine D1 chelated with Ga 3+  ( Ga-2 ) ( Figure   A). Siderophores from this family displayed four characteristic neutral losses ( a ,  e ,  d , and  b ) produced by remote hydrogen rearrangement (RHR). After losing a molecule of water ( a ), the characteristic terminal acetylated cadaverine unit is cleaved observing a neutral loss of  m / z  142.1108 ( e , calc. for C 7 H 14 N 2 O,  m / z  142.1106, Δ 1.4 ppm). This cleavage is then followed by the loss of a succinyl moiety (fragment  d , calc. for C 4 H 2 O 2 ,  m / z  82.0055, Δ 2.4 ppm) and a cadaverine unit ( b , calc. for C 5 H 12 N 2 ,  m / z  100.1000, Δ 1.0 ppm) ( Figure   A). These fragmentations confirmed not only the presence of the two HSC units but also their structural resemblance to desferrioxamine D1 ( Figure S22 and S23 ).   4.     Open in a new tab   MS/MS fragmentation patterns:  N -acetylated terminal siderophores (e.g., compound  Ga-2 ) (A), hydroxamic acid-terminal siderophores (e.g., compound  Ga-11 ) (B), and  N -succinic acid terminal siderophores (e.g., compound  Ga-20 ) (C). The second familiy of compounds is characterized by the presence of a hydroxamic acid functionality at one end. This motif was previously reported in the structures of tenacibactin K, L, and M that were isolated from a coral-associated gliding bacterium of the genus  Tenacibaculum  ( Figure   B). MS/MS fragmentation analyses, explained by RHR, enabled the structural proposal of seven new putative tenacibactin-like compounds ( 10 – 16 ) across subnetworks 4 and 5 ( Figure   B). These tenacibactin-like siderophores displayed the loss of a water molecule ( a ) and a characteristic loss of 33.0209 Da, which matches the loss of NH 2 OH ( f ). Then, the loss of a succinyl moiety (fragment  d , calc. for C 4 H 2 O 2 ,  m / z  82.0055, Δ 2.4 ppm) is also observed ( Figures   B and