>Materials and methods   Culture of animals   To conduct a comparative study with two cnidaria species, namely a jellyfish ( Cassiopeia andromeda ) and a sea anemone ( Entacmaea quadricolor ), an  ex-situ  experiment was carried out in the marine experimental facilities (MAREE) at the Leibniz Centre for Tropical Marine Research (ZMT), in Bremen, Germany. The stock cultures of these animals have been cultured in aquaria for about ten years under similar conditions, and both species are therefore assumed to contain highly homogeneous photosymbiont communities. Both species host specific clades of dinoflagellate symbionts from the Symbiodiniaceae family.  Cassiopea  predominantly hosts  Symbiodinium  (clade A), while  Entacmaea quadricolor  typically contains symbionts from  Cladocopium  (clade C), though it can harbor multiple clades depending on environmental conditions  [32] ,  [33] . All experiments in this study were conducted in accordance with German ethics on animal welfare.   Before the experiment,  C. andromeda  and  E. quadricolor  specimens were reared in aquarium tanks (200 L) connected to an automated water treatment system, and the water was circulated through a biofilter and a protein skimmer (EHEIM, Germany). Following the recirculating water treatment, approximately 25 % of the culture water was exchanged every week to maintain water quality at the highest level. The tanks were filled with artificial seawater (Red Sea Salt, Red Sea Fish, Israel) with water temperature and salinity set at 26 °C and 35 S A , respectively. The ambient light was provided artificially using Aquaillumination Hydra FiftyTwo HD (AI Hydra 52 HyperDrive, USA) lamps with seven types of LEDs, emitting the full spectrum (380–680 nm) of photoactive radiation (PAR) with a photon flux density of 100 μmol photons m −2  s −1  under a 12:12 h light/dark cycle. The specimens were fed daily with freshly hatched  Artemia nauplii  and kept under such conditions for at least six months before being used in this study. Acclimatization and experimental setup   For each species, jellyfish (size from 2 to 6 cm, life span ca. 4 years) and sea anemone (size from 2 to 4 cm, life span ca. 10 years), 48 equally sized (according to wet weight), intact, and healthy individuals were removed from the MAREE baseline tanks and placed into an experimental system. The experimental setup consisted of three water baths (200 L), each containing four plastic aquaria (10 L) carrying eight test organisms (four of each species). In the experimental setup, test specimens were acclimated for one week to baseline salinity (35.0 PSU) and light conditions (blue/white combination of fluorescence bulbs 4×54 W T5 at a 12 h day/night cycle). The temperature was incrementally increased to 28 °C during the acclimatization phase. After this week of acclimatization, an experimental phase with a length of four days was started. Throughout the experimental phase, the water temperature in one water bath was elevated (2 °C/day) to reach 30 °C on day two, 32 °C on day three, and 34 °C on the final day four. In the second water bath, the test specimens were exposed to a daily dose (2.2 KJ m −2 ) of UV-B (285 and 310 nm) irradiation. The daily UV-B dose was emitted throughout 1 h over the experimental time the specimens received a total UV-B dose of 2.2 KJ m −2  on day two, 4.4 KJ m −2  on day three, and 6.6 KJ m −2  on day four. The third water bath served as a control treatment, with constant environmental parameters set at the end of the acclimatization phase. To maintain good water quality in the closed plastic aquaria, the test specimens were not fed during the acclimatization and experimental phases, and 30 % of the water volume was exchanged daily. To maintain a constant salinity in the aquaria, the volume of evaporated water was refilled daily with osmosis water before water exchange.   In addition to the monitoring of water parameters, the following data collection and sampling routine was conducted daily throughout the experiment: 1) documentation of general vitality parameters for  C. andromeda  (number of bell pulsations per minute) and  E. quadricolor  (organism closed or tentacles spread out) and observations such as behavioral abnormalities and injuries. 2) quantum yield of photosystem II (PSII) (Fv/Fm) using pulse amplitude-modulated fluorometry (Diving-PAM; Walz, Effeltrich, Germany). 3) Sampling one specimen of each species from every plastic aquarium (n = 4) per treatment by snap-freezing the whole specimen in liquid nitrogen and storing it at −80 °C until further chemical analyses. Chemicals and reagents   LC/MS grade solvents were purchased from Baker (The Netherlands), and MilliQ water was used for all LC analyses. Sarcophine standard was purchased from AG Scientific (San Diego, CA, USA). Louis, MO, USA). Sample preparation for (UHPLC-ESI-LIT-Orbitrap-MS) analysis   Sample extraction followed the protocol described in a previous report  [34]  with some modifications explained as follows. Approximately 20 mg of powdered freeze-dried anemone or jellyfish tissues was ground with a pestle in a mortar under liquid nitrogen. The powder was then homogenized with 2.0 mL 100 % ethanol containing 10μg ml −1  umbelliferone (as an internal standard for UHPLC-MS) using an ultrasonic bath for 20 min. The extracts were then centrifuged at 12,000×g for 5 min to remove debris. For UHPLC-MS analyses, 500 μL was aliquoted and filtered through a 22 μm filter. For each specimen, four biological replicates were extracted and analyzed in parallel under the same conditions. Metabolites profiling of animal extracts via high-resolution ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (UHPLC-ESI-LIT-Orbitrap-MS)   For metabolite profiling in control and stressed animal specimens at different time points, runs of UHPLC-ESI linear ion trap-orbital trap hybrid mass spectrometry were carried out using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). UHPLC separation was carried out on a Waters Acquity HSS T3 column (particle size 1.8 µm, pore size 100 Å, 100×1 mm ID, Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany), column temperature 40 °C using the same binary gradient and flow rate described for the LCQ Deca XP MAX system using water and acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1 % formic acid as eluents A and B, respectively. The flow rate was set at 0.15 mL min −1 , and the following separation gradient starting on injection was implemented: 1 min of 5 % B, linear ramp to 100 % B in 10 min, isocratic part at 100 % B for the next 8 min with ramp back to 5 % B in 1 min and a re-equilibration phase of 10 min, with an injection volume of 2 μL. Mass spectra were collected in negative and positive ion modes for the  m / z  range of 200 – 2,000, heated ESI source set at 250 °C, spray voltage 4.0 kV, capillary temperature 300 °C, FTMS resolution 30,000. In the positive and negative modes, the sheath, auxiliary, and sweep gases (nitrogen) were adjusted to 18, 12, and 0 arbitrary units or 20, 5, and 1 arbitrary units, respectively. The CID mass spectra (buffer gas: helium) in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode were recorded using a normalized collision energy of 35 % with an FTMS resolution of 15,000. The data were evaluated using Xcalibur software 2.2 SP1.48. UHPLC-MS data processing, metabolites identification, and modeling   Raw data were visualized using the open-access data analysis software Mzmine 2.53  [35] , where peaks were identified according to their retention times, accurate masses, elution order, fragmentation patterns, and formulas suggested by the software. The files were further analyzed by exporting mgf-files to Sirius 4.9.12+ CSI:FingerID software  [36]  ( https://bio.informatik.uni-jena.de/sirius/ ) to manually search structural databases, i.e., PubChem, a phytochemical dictionary of natural products, to aid in identification, where structural hits search was set to 20 ppm as  m / z  tolerance cut off.   Feature-based molecular networking   The Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking (GNPS) platform is a powerful database that has revolutionized the identification of metabolites, enabling scientists to explore the immense potential of natural marine products. Compounds are aligned in generated molecular networks that serve as visual representations of the chemical relationships between different compounds  [37] . GNPS was employed to aid peak identification by comparing the tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data to online databases and distributing metabolites in classified clusters, especially as the first attempt in both marine organisms.   Raw UHPLC-MS/MS files were uploaded as mgf files to the Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking open-access website ( https://gnps.ucsd.edu ). Data were analyzed using an online workflow, where the precursor ion mass tolerance and MS/MS fragment ion tolerance were both set to 0.07 Da. Accordingly, networks were created where the edges had a cosine score >0.7 and more than four matching peaks. Further, the spectra in the network were queried against GNPS spectral databases (NIST13, MassBank, and Respect) and further visualized and analyzed using Cytoscape software. UHPLC-MS multivariate data analysis   Furthermore, chemometric tools were employed to aid in species classification and marker identification in response to different stressors. Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA), in addition to supervised methods such as orthogonal projection to least-squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA), was employed  [10] . The raw files of UHPLC-MS of all samples were converted into “.abf” files, using an ABF converter ( https://www.reifycs.com/AbfConverter/ ). Accordingly, MS-DIAL software ( https://prime.psc.riken.jp/compms/msdial/main.html ) was employed for data extraction using the following parameters: retention time (0–25 min), mass range (50–1,000 Da), and accurate mass tolerance for MS1 (0.01 Da) and MS2 (0.025 Da). The peak abundance mass list was exported for the multivariate data analysis. The exported data were subjected to unsupervised and supervised multivariate data analysis, i.e., PCA, hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), and OPLS-DA using SIMCA 14.1 software (Umetrics, Sweden) to show the segregation and aggregation patterns between samples and highlight the variation. All input variables were scaled to the Pareto scale and mean-centered. Results and Discussion   UV light and thermal impact on cnidarian organisms' appearance and PSII quantum yield   The visual examination of animals during the study of increasing UV light exposure versus increasing tank water temperature from 28 °C to 34 °C over 4 days period revealed how stressors affected the morphological appearance of both organisms. The day 1 samples ( Suppl. Fig. 1 A) shows anemones and jellyfish under control conditions without UV exposure and at 28 °C. UV-treated anemones sampled on day 2 (2.2 KJ m −2 ) showed closed tentacles, as depicted in  Suppl. Fig. 1 B1, while in the case of jellyfish, mucus was discharged, and their tentacles looked centered forming a crown shape  Suppl. Fig. 1 B2, and some jellyfish lost their tentacles. On the 3rd day of UV exposure (4.4 KJ m −2 ), jellyfish started to flip over and lose control of their position with more mucus discharge and total loss of tentacles  Suppl. Fig. 1 (C1, C2). In contrast, the anemones seemed swollen as if they had absorbed an excess of water, showing an oddly translucent appearance, unlike their normal state, and started to turn slightly transparent, as illustrated in  Suppl. Fig. 1 C3. The elevated temperature did not show obvious morphological differences, except for the sudden death of the anemone on day 4 as the temperature reached 34 °C ( Suppl. Fig. 1 D1). Conversely, on the 4th day of UV exposure (6.6 KJ m −2 ), anemones appeared filled with much less water ( Suppl. Fig. 1 D2, compared to their counterparts under control conditions. In addition, jellyfish showed minimal activity and could not regulate locomotive functions ( Suppl. Fig. 1 D3).   When exposed to elevated temperature or UV radiation, Fv/Fm declined in anemone reaching minimum value on the 4th and 3rd day, respectively ( Suppl. Table 1 ). Symbionts conferred some tolerance to the host on the first two days, most obvious on the 2nd day. At 32 °C and 34 °C, anemone the thermal tolerance was lost as Fv/Fm declined significantly. In contrast, the decline of Fv/Fm was less pronounced in anemone upon UV exposure suggesting that anemone may differentially acclimate to light levels based on stress phenotype. The jellyfish were more constantly affected by both stressors as manifested in the Fv/Fm decline reaching the lowest value on the 4th day ( Suppl. Table 2 ). In addition, bell pulsations per minute were declined especially upon exposure to UV radiation. Interestingly, Fv/Fm declined faster in anemone compared to jellyfish. This may be attributed to different symbiont genotypes in both animals. Upon exposure to certain stress at the same dose, jellyfish increased their rate of photosynthesis even if PSII damage occurred while, anemone relied on photoinhibition to prevent PSII damage from occurring in the first place  [38] . Metabolites profiling in cnidarian organisms via UHPLC-MS aided by molecular networking   To understand the changes in metabolite profiles associated with the bleaching process, alongside anemone and jellyfish metabolome profiles unreported in the literature, untargeted metabolomics in the two cnidarian organisms was attempted via UHPLC-MS in control animals and post-exposure to stressors, i.e. ,  elevated temperature and UV radiation. A total of 134 primary and secondary metabolites were annotated in the control and stressed organisms, as detected in both positive and negative ionization modes, to provide a comprehensive overview of the metabolomes of animals. The identified metabolites were categorized into several classes including phospholipids, glycolipids, fatty acids, peptides, sphingolipids, ceramides, and terpenoids. Metabolite annotation was based on the elution range, i.e. ,  retention time, accurate mass ( m / z ) and molecular formula, tandem MS/MS, and isotopic distribution, as detailed in  Suppl. Tables S3 and S4 .   Furthermore, global natural product social (GNPS) molecular networking was employed for the first time to aid in the peak identification and annotation of unknown peaks, especially as the first attempt in both species to characterize their metabolome. The relative abundance of each metabolite in different specimens is illustrated in a pie chart for each node, where each sample was encoded with a different color to aid in the visual observation of the segregation patterns ( Fig. 1 ). The colored codes of all samples are explained for each network.   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Molecular networks generated from UHPLC-MS dataset of jellyfish  C. andromeda  after UV exposure; (A) positive ionization mode; and (B) negative ionization mode. The phospholipid cluster represented the main cluster in both ionization modes, followed by steroids/terpenoids in the negative mode, likely attributed to the improved ionization of terpenoids in the negative ion mode. Ceramides and glycolipid clusters were more detectable in the positive ionization mode, likely because of their nitrogen atoms, especially in ceramides ( Fig. 1 ,  Fig. 2  &  Suppl. Fig. S2 ).   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Molecular networks generated from the UHPLC-MS dataset of anemone  E. quadricolor  showing fatty acids, glycolipids, and ceramide clusters in positive ionization mode, (A) heat stress, and (B) UV stress. GNPS aided in the identification of phospholipid classes based on specific mass losses of 14 and 28 amu at the edges of the clusters, thereby confirming their annotations ( Suppl. Fig. S2 ). This was demonstrated in positive ion mode networks, where a node with a precursor mass of  m / z  482 was connected to another node at  m / z  454 through a 28 amu labeled edge, corresponding to the loss of a carbonyl moiety. Likewise, in the negative ion mode network, a tri-nodal cluster built up of precursor masses at  m / z  436, 450, and 464 exhibited 14 and 28 amu labeled edges separating the nodes and corresponding to consecutive demethylation. These mass losses provide valuable insights into the classification and structural characteristics of phospholipids as the major class in both animal species.   Upon manual annotation, nodes with precursor masses of  m / z  950 and  m / z  976 were identified as glycolipids, based on the reported fragmentation  [39] , and to amount to another major class in both organisms that was detected exclusively in the positive ionization mode .  Subsequently, other members within the same cluster with precursor masses of  m / z  788,  m / z  790,  m / z  814,  m / z  948, and  m / z  952 were readily annotated, leveraging the determined class. The presence of edges between these nodes indicates the loss of a hexose moiety (162amu) in certain glycolipids, thereby confirming their annotation ( Fig. 2 ).   Ceramide-related compounds were annotated based on detailed tandem-MS investigation using GNPS-associated libraries. Clusters were built of nodes with mass shifts on the edges of 2 amu (H 2 ), 14 amu (CH 2 ), 28 amu (C 2 H 4 ), and 56 amu (C 4 H 8 )  [40] . Ceramide clusters were observed in most networks of jellyfish, regardless of the ionization mode; however, they only appeared in the positive ionized mode networks in the case of anemone. The following subsections explain the identification details for each metabolite class ( Suppl. Fig. S3-S9 ) alongside major changes observed upon exposure to stress conditions in both animals. Phospholipids (PLs)   Phospholipids (PLs) act as integral membrane components that maintain the integrity of cell membranes  [41]  and are likely to play a major role in the heat stress response. PLs also contribute to maintaining normal cell physiological functions, such as the production and transport of crucial peptides into the cells of jellyfish  [42] . Phospholipids were the most identified metabolite class represented by 21 peaks in  E. quadricolor,  and 25 peaks in  C. andromeda,  with the largest clusters in molecular networks for both positive and negative ionization modes. Phospholipids can be subcategorized into phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylinositol (PI), lysophospholipids (LP), and lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE).   GNPS aided in the identification of phospholipid classes based on specific mass differences of 12 amu, 16 amu, and 28 amu. This was demonstrated in the negative mode networks of anemone, where a node with a precursor mass of  m / z  478 was connected to three nodes at  m / z  466, 494, and 450 through 12, 16, and 28-amu labeled edges, respectively ( Suppl. Fig. S2 a and b). Likewise, a tetra-nodal cluster built up of precursor masses at  m / z  480 (peak A34), 498 (peak A7), 500 (peak A11), and 522 (peak A47) exhibited 18, 20, 22, and 24 amu labeled edges separating the nodes ( Suppl. Fig. S2 b). These peaks were annotated as LPE (18:0), PE (O-20:5/0:0), LPE (20:4), and PC (O-18:0/O-1:0).   Additionally, a parent ion at  m / z  464 with the molecular formula [C 23 H 47 NO 6 P] -  in peak A39 showed fragmented ions at  m / z  421 and 267 due to the successive loss of ethyl amine and glycerophosphate moieties, respectively ( Suppl. Fig. S3 ).   In jellyfish, lysophosphatidylcholines (LPCs) were identified mostly based on fragment ion at  m / z  184  [43] , exemplified in LPC (O-16:0) at  m / z  482 [M + H] +  (C 24 H 53 NO 6 P + ), and LPC (O-14:0) at  m / z  454 [M + H] +  (C 22 H 49 NO 6 P + ). LPC appeared to decline upon both thermal and UV exposure, thus affecting the cell membrane integrity, which might lead to component diffusion. PEs were mostly detected in the negative ionization mode ( Fig. 1 B,  Suppl. Fig. S2 ) and identified based on the product ions at  m / z  140 and 196 (from [M−H] - ). Saturated PLs were exemplified in PE (P-16:0) detected at  m / z  436 (C 21 H 43 NO 6 P - ) and PE (O-18:0) at  m / z  464 (C 23 H 47 NO 6 P - ) as the major peaks in jellyfish. Polyunsaturated PEs, i.e. ,  LPE (20:4) at  m / z  500 (C 25 H 43 NO 7 P - ), showed a 1.4-fold increase upon thermal and UV stresses, and opposite to the observed pattern in the case of LPC. Additionally, lysophosphatidylinositol (LPI 18:0) at  m / z  599 (C 27 H 52 O 12 P - ) was annotated based on the fragment ion at  m / z  241 (C 6 H 10 O 8 P - )  [44] , whereas phosphatidylserine (PS 18:0/0:0) at  m / z  526 was annotated based on the loss of 87 amu corresponding to the serine group, in accordance with literature  [43] . Glycolipids   Glycolipids function as receptors on cell membranes and may account for specific cellular contacts and signal transduction. They have been reported in jellyfish-associated organisms  [45]  exemplified in monogalactosyldiacylglycerol (MGDG) and digalactosyldiacylglycerol (DGDG). A total of seven peaks were detected in jellyfish, compared to four from this class in anemone ( Suppl. Table S3 and S4 ).   MGDG was annotated based on the typical fragmentation pattern in glycolipids resulting from the combined loss of ammonia NH 3  (17amu), followed by a hexose moiety loss (162amu) leading to an [M + H-179] +  fragment ion, and the other fragment ion corresponding to [M + H-197] + , which is formed by the combined loss of NH 3  (17amu) followed by a hexose ring loss (180amu)  [39] . MGDG was exemplified in MGDG (38:9) at  m / z  814 (C 47 H 76 NO 10 + ), and MGDG (36:7) at  m / z  790 (C 45 H 76 NO 10 + ). All the identified MGDGs showed a massive decline upon exposure to UV and heat.   Similarly, DGDGs represented in DGDG (36:8) at  m / z  950 (C 51 H 84 NO 15 + ) and DGDG 38:9 at  m / z  976 (C 53 H 86 NO 15 + ) were identified according to reported fragmentation, showing key fragment ions [M + H-197] +  and [M + H-359] +   [39] . Both MGDG and DGDG showed an approximately 1.4-to 1.8-fold increase in abundance after thermal exposure. Sphingolipids/ceramides   Ceramide clusters were observed in positive ion mode with mass shifts on the edges of 2 (H 2 ), 26 (C 2 H 2 ), and 28 (CO 2 ) amu ( Fig. 2 b). Aquatic organisms such as cnidaria (i.e. ,  jellyfish and anemones) are characterized by the presence of sphingophospholipids, which contribute to cellular membrane protection and signaling  [46] . In contrast to the aforementioned glycolipids, ceramides are correlated with cold acclimation by increasing unsaturated fatty acid levels in cold habitats  [46] . Both organisms encompassed similar numbers of peaks in this class.   In anemone, peak A67 [M + H] +  was detected at  m / z  554 with a base peak at  m / z  494 corresponding to the loss of water and propyl groups, in addition to the key fragment ion at  m / z  146 attributed to the  glycero -amide unit ( Suppl. Fig. S4 ) and annotat