>Methods   Reference substances and preparation   All reference steroids (n = 88) were acquired from steraloids (Newport, RI, USA), including  epi -19-nortestosterone, 19-nortestosterone, 19-norandrosterone, 19-noretiocholanolone, 19-nortestosterone sulfate, estradiol, testosterone, androstenedione, 5β-estran-3α, 17α-diol, 5α-estran-3β, 17α-diol, 5α-estran-3α, 17β-diol, cortisone, dexamethasone, prednisolone, etc. Each steroid stock solution was prepared at 100 µg/mL in ethanol. The working standard solutions were prepared by the dilution of stock standard solutions in methanol. The preparation of the reference compounds for LC-HRMS involved analysis of 88 steroid reference compounds. The working solution was 10 µg/mL, and the injection volume was 5 µL. For GC-HRMS analysis, 27 steroid reference compounds have been prepared in a working solution at 10 µg/mL. These 27 steroids were then derivatized 40 min at 60°C with 20 µL MSTFA-TMIS-DTE (1000:5:5, v/v/w). Afterwards, the compounds were ready for injection. All of the solutions were stored in amber glass vials at −20 °C. Urine samples and preparation   The urine samples were collected from bovine treated with steroids and already stored at the biobank of the laboratory at −20 °C. Bovine urine samples were prepared as follows and according to previously publications 14 , 33 . Briefly, 10 mL of urine samples were added with 10 ng 17β nandrolone-d 3  and 17β-estradiol-d 3 , 1 mL acetate buffer (2 M, pH 5.2) and 200 µL β-glucuronidase from purified Helix pomatia (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Quentin Fallavier, France). Hydrolysis was performed over 15 h at 52 °C. Urine samples were centrifuged (10 min, 1000×g) before purification on SPE Envi-ChromP. Then, cartridges were conditioned with 6 mL ethyl acetate, 6 mL methanol and 6 mL water. The extraction was applied to the column. The phase was washed with 3 mL water and then 2 mL hexane. The high vacuum was applied before and after each washing. Steroids were eluted with 14 mL hexane/diethyl ether (70:30, v/v), which were evaporated to dryness under a gentle stream of nitrogen. After hydrolysis, 0.5 mL of 1 M of NaOH was added. Liquid/liquid extractions in an alkaline medium phase performed with 4 mL hexane/diethyl ether (70:30, v/v) permitted the extraction. The extraction was centrifuged for 1 min, 700 g. The residue supernatant was applied onto an SPE silica column conditioned with 6 mL hexane. The column was washed with 3 mL hexane/ethyl acetate (75:25, v/v) and then 8 mL hexane/ethyl acetate (85:15, v/v). The analytes were eluted with 20 mL hexane/ethyl acetate (60:40, v/v), which were evaporated to dryness under a gentle stream of nitrogen. After that, 10 ng norgestrel (Sigma-Aldrich) was added as an external standard. Finally, the urine samples were derivatized for 40 min at 60 °C with 20 µL MSTFA-TMIS-DTE (1000:5:5, v/v/w). Two µL samples were injected into the GC-Q- Exactive. Chemicals and reagents   All reagents and solvents used in this study were of analytical grade unless otherwise specified. Acetonitrile was purchased from Honeywell Chromasolv (Bucharest, Romania). Formic acid (eluent additive for LC-MS) was acquired from LGC Standards GmbH (Wesel, Germany). Isotope-labeled internal standards, namely, L-lecine-5,5,5-d 3 , L-tryptophan-2,3,3-d 3 , indole-2,4,5,6,7-3-acetic acid, and 1,14-tetradecanedioic-d 24  acid were purchased from sigma-Aldrich (Saint Quentin Fallavier, France). MSCAL6 Proteo Mass LTQ/FT-Hybrid, standard mixtures used for calibration of the MS instrument (positive, negative ionization mode) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Fallavier, France). Ultra-pure water was acquired from VWR (Fontenay-sous-Bois, France). Envi-ChromP and silica (0.5 g and 1 g stationary phase, respectively) solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges were from Carlo Erba Réactifs SDS (Val de Rueil, France). Derivatisation reagents N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroacetamide (MSTFA), dithio-threitol (DTE) and trimethyliodosilane (TMIS) were purchased from Acros Organics (Geel, Belgium). The internal standards used were 17β-nandrolone-d 3  (17β-NT-d 3 ), 17β-estradiol-d 3  (17β-E2-d 3 ) from NARL reference materials (Pymble, Australia). Data acquisition   88 steroid reference compounds were characterized on LC-Q–Exactive and the analysis was performed according to previously reported LC-based methods for steroids analysis 20 , 33 , 34 . The chromatographic separation was performed on an Acquity UPLC® System from Waters®, C18 column (Acquity UPLC® BEH C18, 2.1 × 100 mm, 1.7 mm; Waters®). Separations were carried out at 50 °C under gradient elution conditions. Elution solvents were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). The mobile phase was supplied at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. Two gradient programs were used for analysing different kinds of steroids: one gradient for characterizing steroid esters and progestogens standards, while another gradient program was for characterizing androgens as well as estrones and others. The elution gradient (A/B,  v/v ) of androgens, estrones characterization was as follows: 95:5 between 0 and 0.3 min, 57:46 at 9.6 min, 0:100 from 13.5 to 15.5 min, and 95:5 from 16 to 19.5 min. At the same time, the elution gradient (A/B,  v/v ) for characterizing steroid esters and progestogens standards was as follows: 50:50 from 0 to 2 min; 90:10 at 9.6 min, 0:100 from 13.5 to 15.5 min, 50:50 from 16 to 19.5 min. The acquisition was performed on an Exactive–Exactive system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in positive and negative electrospray ionization mode (ESI + /–). The spectrometric parameters are as follows: spray voltage 3.0 kV, capillary temperature 350 °C, sheath gas flow rate 55 U, gas flow rate 10 AU, sheath gas flow rate 55 AU, and the column oven temperature 50 °C. The MS settings were described as follows: The full scan mass spectra were acquired from 66.7 to 1000  m/z  with a mass resolution of 70 000 in centroid mode, maximum inject time 200 ms, 1e6 AGC target and the 0 to 19.5 min runtime. The integrated Xcalibur software version 4.1 was used for data acquisition and analysis. Background ions can be evaluated and put onto an “exclusion list” to increase the likelihood of obtaining MS2 spectra. Additionally, a separate injection acquired by data-dependent MS2 (DDMS2) for a set of precursor ions (exclusion lists) in the positive or negative was performed to collect more diagnostic MS2 spectra. The parameters of DDMS2 were as follows: 17 500 resolution, 1e5 AGC target, maximum inject time 60 ms, loop count 5, Isolation window 1.0 m/z, collision energy 10, 30, 60; dd setting (Minimum AGC target 6.00e3, Intensity threshold 1.0e5, Charge exclusion 3–8, >8, dynamic exclusion 3.0 s).   Twenty-seven steroid reference compounds were also characterized using a GC-EI-Q–Exactive, according to analytical parameters already reported 15 , 35 – 37 . In this sense, 1 µL of derivatized steroid standards were injected into the GC injector at 250 °C by the robotic arm TriPlu TM  RSH autosampler (Thermo Scientific TM , Bremen, Germany). A flow rate of 5 mL/min of helium in split flow (20.0 mL/min) was applied. The chromatographic separation was performed on a TRACE TM  1310 gas chromatography instrument (Thermo Scientific TM , Austin, TX, USA). Helium carrier gas at a flow rate of 1 mL/min was applied for the separation on OPTIMA 5-MS Accent column (30 m length 0.2×5 mm i.d. 0.25 μm, SN 1205365). The temperature gradient program was set as follows: the temperature was initially held at 120 °C for 2 min, a 15 °C/min ramp rate was applied up to 320 °C, and the final temperature of 320 °C was held for 13 min, and the total run time was 20 min. Eluting peaks were transferred through an auxiliary transfer temperature of 320 °C into a Q Exactive TM -GC mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific TM , Bremen, Germany). Electron ionization (EI) at 70 eV energy and emission current of 50 µA was used as ionization mode, setting an ion source temperature of 300 °C. Data was acquired in full scan mode and PRM mode with a mass range of  m/z  66.7–1000 and a resolving power of 120 000 at  m/z  200. AGC Target was set at 5 × 10 5  ions with an automatic filling limit and maximum IT at 500 ms. The instrument was controlled by Xcalibur software version 4.1.   The urine samples were analysed under the same conditions as those applied for the characterisation of steroid reference compounds on the GC-HRMS platform. Database constitution   A database of 88 steroid reference compounds acquired on LC-Q-Exactive was generated, including molecular formula, exact mass, retention time and detected ion in positive and negative modes. Xcalibur version 4.3 software was used to integrate chromatographic peaks acquired in full scan mode with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm. The workflow has been developed and relies on a combination of open bioinformatics tools, including MZmine ( https://github.com/mzmi  ne/mzmine2/releases) 38 – 40 , Cytoscape (Version 3.8,  https://cytoscape.org/ ) 41  and GNPS Web-platform 28 , the workflow of database and molecular networking constitution is shown in Fig.  3 . Statistical analysis is done predominantly from MS1-based peaks with a specific accurate mass-to-charge ( m/z ) ratio, described as features of MS-based metabolomics studies. Feature-based molecular network (FBMN) can link MS1 intensities derived from LC-MS features with MS2 information from molecular networking, which bridges the gap between MS1 abundance and MS2 qualitative information compared to classical molecular networking 42 . So FBMN job was performed on the GNPS platform ( https://gnps.ucsd.edu ). The database constitution procedure of 88 steroid standards, which were acquired on LC-Q–Exactive is as follows. Firstly, the 88 standards files in. raw were converted to centroided.mzML format using MSconvert (version 3.0.20248,  http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/downloads.shtml ) 43 . Secondly, a feature detection and alignment tool, MZmine (version 2.53) was used to process the data, which allowed the annotation of steroid isomers 40 . The step allowed the detection of the spectral features across the chromatographic fractions, so  Targeted Feature Detection  was used to detect all the features. The parameters are as following: mass detector = Centroid, intensity tolerance = 50,  m/z  tolerance = 0.05 & 10.0 ppm, retention time tolerance = 2.0 min, algorithm = Wavelets (ADAP),  m/z  centre calculation = MEDIAN,  m/z  range for MS2 scan pairing = 0.1 Da, RT range for MS2 scan pairing = 0.2 min,  S/N  threshold = 10,  S/N  estimator = intensity window SN, feature height = 1 min, area threshold = 15, peak duration range = 0.02–1.0 min, RT wavelet range = 0.01–0.02,  m/z  tolerance = 0.001 & 5.0 ppm, retention time tolerance = 0.05 min. Then two files were exported:  a feature quantification table  (.CSV format) and a MS2 spectral summary (.MGF format). The feature quantification table contains information about features of 88 steroid standards including retention time, intensity,  m/z  value and feature ID (unique identifier) for each feature. The MS2 spectral summary contains a list of MS2 spectra, with one representative MS2 spectrum per feature. Thirdly, the data was achieved by analysing MS/MS data on the GNPS Web platform 28 . The parameters of FBMN are as follows: precursor ion mass tolerance = 0.02 Da, fragment ion mass tolerance = 0.02 Da, minimum cosine score = 0.5, and maximum analogue search mass difference = 100. The analogue search mode was used by searching against MS/MS spectra with a maximum difference of 100 in the precursor ion value. The resulting network was filtered based on edges, and the edges between two nodes were retained in the network only if each node appeared in the respective top 10 most similar nodes of the other node. The spectra in the network were compared against GNPS spectral libraries and our library built in this study. The molecular network job is available on the GNPS platform:  https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task = 1b18a9f9c1e649e59deb186ffa020c49 . Finaly visualization and analysis of GNPS-generate molecular networks can be performed in Cytoscape (Version 3.8), open-source software for visualizing complex networks 41 . All the dereplicated steroid standards were assigned within the network based on LC-Q-Exactive, MS2 and retention time matching. Adduct connection was manually introduced in the network to provide an ion identity molecular network 44 .   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   The workflow of database constitution and molecular network. A database was also generated for data acquired on GC-Q-Exactive including retention time, MS, and MS2 information extracted manually by using Xcalibur version 4.3. The 27 standards files in. raw were also converted to centroided.mzML format using MSconvert (version 3.0.20248). FTP client (WinSCP for Windows) was used to upload data files to MassIVE, a public repository. A repository scale analysis infrastructure for GC-MS data enables the creation of networks within the GNPS molecular networking platform. The community infrastructure can be accessed at  https://gnps.ucsd.edu , under the heard “GC-MS EI Data Analysis”. MS Hub algorithms ( https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/static/gnps-splash.jsp ) were used for data processing deconvolution. Then, the.mgf file was generated by GNPS-MSHub, including the deconvoluted spectra with aligned retention time and feature table of the peak of the feature across all files, and then searched against the public libraries and private libraries generated in this study. The MSHUB-GC job and molecular network job are available on the GNPS platform:  https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=1c23aec9a10848d3ae24c8554fd81071# ;  https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/status.jsp?task=6ec04b438b444203b00edc096fa11015 . The molecular network was also visualized in the Cytoscape (Version 3.8,  https://cytoscape.org/ ) 41 . Molecular network construction based LC-HRMS database   The database of LC-HRMS involves formulae, accurate mass, retention time, MS1 and MS2 spectra of 88 reference steroid compounds, which correspond to 198 spectra due to multiple detected adducts-producing spectra. These steroids could be separated from 4.6 to 14.56 min on LC-Q-Exactive Most of the steroids could be detected in positive mode, especially [M + H] + , [M–2H 2 O + H] +  and [M–H 2 O + H] + , such as 19-nortestosterone, androsterone, estradiol and boldenone. The group of testosterone steroids can be only detected in [M + H] + ,  e.g .,  epi -testosterone, testosterone benzoate, testosterone decanoate and 4-chlorotestosterone. As for some androgens, the known metabolites of 17β-nandrolone could be detected in [M–H 2 O + H] +  and [M–2H 2 O + H] + , including estranediols, 19-norandrostendione and 19-norandrosterone. Six steroids could be detected in both positive mode and negative mode, 19-nortestosterone sulfate, 19-nortestosterone glucuronide, estradiol 3-glucuronide, 17-sulfate, estradiol 17-sulfate, estradiol 3-glucuronide, estradiol 17-glucuronide. Furthermore, one interesting point is that estradiol 3-glucuronide, 17-sulfate and estradiol 17-glucuronide can be only detected in negative mode, [M–2H] 2– , [M–H] – , and [M–Na] – , [2M-Na] – , respectively. Thus, the database was used to construct the molecular network. Figure  4  describes the molecular network involving 88 reference steroids presented in circular-shaped nodes. The molecular network was constructed based on the FBMN job, which was performed on GNPS. This molecular network was built on the fundamental observation that structurally related molecules share fragment ion patterns when subjected to MS2 fragmentation methods. Structurally related molecules yield comparable MS2 spectra due to the commonalities in their structures and are represented by separate nodes that connect within the network via edges. In the molecular network, each cluster can be found with the same numbering in the.mgf file, and each node has its spectra information and identification. The compound annotation of this molecular network is based on the steroid standard database generated in this study.   Fig. 4.     Open in a new tab   The visualization of the global LC-HRMS steroid network involving 88 steroid reference compounds. The cosine score is 0.5. The node size was marked according to m/z; steroid families were marked in different colors; the edges were also marked in different colors, which represent the similarities of MS/MS; and the grey edge represents cosine between two nodes; black edge represents the adduct connection; node borders were marked in different colors according to adducts. The ellipse represents the node in ESI “+”, while the diamond represents the node in “–”. The size of the node represents the precursor mass. Because MN allows for the identification of molecular families corresponding to clusters in the network, the spectral similarity is calculated through the cosine score. In this study, the steroid compounds can be observed depending on the relationship between structures in the global molecular network. Overall, the obtained molecular network tended to cluster according to the steroid family. It can thus be observed in Fig.  4  that the androgens (C19 structures) in pink are grouped, the corticosteroids (C21 structures) are also grouped in the blue cluster, and the estrogens (C18 structures) are grouped in the green cluster. Some steroid esters are also highlighted in purple nodes, some of which are not linked to each other because they are grouped with the classification of the steroids,  e.g . androgen steroids or estrogen steroids. At the bottom, there are also several single nodes because of their unique adduct. Most of the steroids are detected in positive mode, especially in [M + H] + , and several steroids can be detected in negative mode, for example, estradiol, 17-glucuronide [M–H] – , estrone, 3-sulfate [2 M + Na–2H] – . Figure  5  shows the comparison between all the steroids detected in various adducts, including androgen, corticosteroid, estrogen and steroid ester. Most of the steroids were detected in adducts with [M + H] + , [M–2H 2 O + H] +  and [M–H 2 O + H] + . Illustrative chemical representatives of the discussed clusters are displayed in Fig.  6 . As an example, Fig.  6A  shows the androgens cluster, the structures and the detected adduct of  epi -19-nortestosterone, 19-nortestosterone, 19-norandrostendione,  epi -testosterone sulfate and  epi -testosterone glucuronide are highlighted. These compounds are grouped in one cluster because their fragmentation leads to similar patterns. An interesting example is that of  epi -testosterone glucuronide, and it could be detected in four adducts, [M + H] + , [M–C 6 H 8 O 6  + H] + , [M–C 6 H 8 O 6 –H 2 O + H] +  and [M + Na] + . As expected, the molecular network cluster of 19-nortestosterone allowed the dereplication of previously known metabolites, including 19-noretiocholanolone,  epi -testosterone, 19-norandrostendione and 19-norandrosterone. For illustration purposes, another two examples are in Fig.  6B  and  6C , estradiol 3-glucuronide, 17-sulfate and estradiol 17-glucuronide could only be detected in positive mode and linked with estradiol 17-glucuronide in the cluster. Dexamethasone is also an interesting compound, which can also be detected in different adducts and form into a cluster with other corticosteroids, such as cortisone, prednisolone, and prednisone. Molecular families are clusters of molecules whose structures are expected to be similar to each other, which gives multiple advantages to further metabolomics data analysis.   Fig. 5.     Open in a new tab   Comparison of chemical species (adducts) detected according to the different steroid families studied. Fig. 6.     Open in a new tab   Zooming in on parts of the network obtained with LC-HRMS data and involving structurally related steroids show similar fragmentation patterns ( A – C ). The edges were also marked in different colors, which represent the similarities of MS/MS; and the grey edge represents cosine between two nodes; black edge represents the adduct connection; node borders were marked in different colors according to adducts. The ellipse represents the node in ESI “+”, while the diamond represents the node in “−”. The size of node represents the precursor mass. Molecular network construction based GC-HRMS database   The database of GC-HRMS contains the formulae, retention time, SMILES, MS spectra and the molecule mass of steroids with two TMS of 27 reference steroids. These steroids could be separated from 13.2 to 15.16 min on GC-Q-Exactive. The majority of GC-MS platforms used in metabolomic studies operate with EI ionisation, and the identification process involves, in addition to the retention time, the specificity associated with the fragmentation process, which depends on the molecular structure 45 . Early MN strategies were developed focusing on LC-ESI-MS data, which differ significantly from traditional GC-EI-MS data. Recently, algorithmic auto-deconvolution of GC-MS data has enabled molecular networking with GNPS. In the GC-MS molecular networking based on GNPS, an essential step for GC-MS data processing, the multiple signals from these highly fragmented spectra must be deconvoluted into individual analyte EI-MS 27 , 46 . In analysing all GC-MS data, spectral deconvolution is the process of separating fragmentation ion patterns for each eluting molecule into a composite mass spectrum. Annotation of GC-MS data is achieved by matching the deconvoluted fragmentation spectra against reference spectral libraries of known molecules. Currently, GC-EI-MS has significantly higher resolution in chromatography and higher reproducibility in ionization, which allows good prospects for applying GC-GNPS in non-targeted approaches. Therefore, the GC-GNPS approach was used to study a set of steroids in the present study. Figure  7  depicts the molecular network generated by GC-GNPS, involving 27 steroid reference compounds characterized on GC-Q-Exactive, which was visualized in Cytoscape. Each node in the molecular network represents a unique mass spectrometry featu