>Methods   Strains, media and culture conditions   All recovered isolates were cryopreserved in 20% glycerol at −80 °C. Reasoner’s 2A (R2A) agar or broth and SMS agar were made according to Berdy  et al . [ 6 ]. Soft nutrient agar was made with a final agar concentration of 0.6% agar for antibiotic overlay assays. A panel of antibiotic-sensitive ( Escherichia coli  DH10B and  Staphylococcus aureus  Newman) and multi-drug-resistant bacteria ( E. coli ,  Klebsiella pneumoniae ,  S. aureus ,  Enterococcus faecium  and  Acinetobacter baumannii ) was used as test organisms (Table S1, available in the online Supplementary Material). Collection of soil samples   Soil was collected from 10 sites in Victoria, Australia, at a depth of ~0 to 15 cm from the soil surface. Topsoil and any accompanying foliage were collected, transported and stored in a clean plastic bag. For incubation of prepared diffusion chambers, the soil sample was collected up to 24 h before use and stored at room temperature until use. Construction of bacterial diffusion chambers   Bacterial diffusion chambers were prepared using a silicone sealant (acetic cure), 0.03 µm semipermeable membranes (Whatman Nuclepore polycarbonate track-etched membranes, Cytiva) and reused 96-well pipette tip inserts, according to the method outlined in Berdy  et al . [ 6 ]. Membranes were cut to a size ~2 cm larger than the surface area of the 96-well pipette tip insert; the overhanging membrane was sealed to the side of the pipette insert, ensuring a thorough seal around the diffusion chamber. Pipette tip inserts were sterilized by submersion in 70% ethanol and allowed to dry before bottom membranes were attached. Diffusion chambers with a bottom membrane affixed were irradiated with UV light for 20 min in a laminar flow hood and were then left inside the laminar flow hood for up to 16 h until fully cured. Following inoculation (see below), the top of the membrane was sealed with another piece of 0.03 µm semipermeable membrane. Diffusion chambers were then left in the laminar flow hood for up to 1 h for the top membrane sealant to dry, before being placed in their soil sample for incubation. An image of the constructed diffusion chambers is shown in Fig. S1. Inoculation and cultivation of diffusion chambers   To inoculate diffusion chambers, soil slurries were initially prepared as outlined in Berdy  et al . [ 6 ]. Cell counts from the microbial fraction of the soil slurries were performed by staining cells with a 1 : 1000 dilution of Syto9 nucleic acid dye (Thermo Scientific), and 10 µl of each dilution was placed onto a haemocytometer, fixed by evaporation at 37 °C for 5 min, coated with 5 µl of ProLong ™  Gold Antifade Mountant with DAPI (Thermo Scientific) and viewed using a fluorescence microscope (BX53, Olympus).   Molten SMS agar was then inoculated with bacteria at an approximate concentration of 1 cell per 100 µl (based on the estimate from cell counting). Nystatin (Gibco ™ ) was added to inoculated SMS agar at a concentration of 100 U ml −1  to prevent fungal growth, and 100 µl of this SMS agar/bacterial cell mixture was aliquoted into 92 wells of the prepared diffusion chamber. Four wells of the diffusion chamber were inoculated with sterile SMS agar and nystatin (at the concentration outlined above) as negative controls. The agar was allowed to set for 30 min, and diffusion chambers were then sealed as outlined above.   Once prepared, each diffusion chamber was placed inside a clean sealed container containing ~5 cm of soil from the respective soil sample. Soil was moistened with distilled water to allow efficient nutrient transfer [ 6 ], and containers were sealed with plastic wrap and incubated in the dark at room temperature for either 2, 3 or 4 weeks. Following incubation, diffusion chambers were removed from their soil samples in a laminar flow hood, and excess external soil was removed by irrigation with sterile water. Comparison of diffusion chamber bacterial recovery   At the same time as the diffusion chambers were inoculated and using the same molten agar/cell mixture, each well of a 24-well plate was inoculated with 500 µl of the same SMS agar/bacteria/nystatin mixture as outlined above. The 24-well plates were maintained in a humid environment at room temperature for the same incubation duration as the diffusion chambers. Colonies appearing in the 24 wells were counted and averaged per millilitre of SMS agar used as the inoculant across the 24-well plate. Recovery of colonies from each 24-well plate (expressed as the number of colonies per 1 ml of agar used to inoculate the plate) was compared to the average number of recovered colonies from a 96-well diffusion chamber plate (again, expressed as colonies per 1 ml of agar used to inoculate the plate). Numbers of colonies from four individual 24-well plates were compared to colonies recovered from their counterpart diffusion chambers. Retrieval and domestication of diffusion chamber colonies   Top membranes were removed from cleaned diffusion chambers, ensuring that no debris contaminated individual wells. Agar plugs in each diffusion chamber well were removed, broken up and spread onto sterile R2A agar plates. Plates were incubated at room temperature for up to 4 weeks and were checked regularly during this time for bacterial growth. On average, each well contained one to three colonies. Individual colonies were picked and passaged onto new R2A agar plates to isolate pure cultures before being stored in cryostorage. Antibiotic overlay assays   Isolates were grown from glycerol stocks in 10 ml of R2A broth at 28 °C with aeration at 200 r.p.m. for 7 days. From each culture, cells were inoculated into designated wells of a 96-well plate in 100 µl aliquots containing 15% glycerol and stored at −80 °C until use. The 96-well plates were made in triplicate and, upon use, were defrosted and used only once before being discarded. A 96-solid-pin multi-blot replicator (VP407FP12, V and P Scientific) was used to transfer ~1.5 µl of defrosted culture from the wells of each prepared 96-well plate onto duplicate 10×10 cm Petri dishes containing R2A agar and incubated at 28 °C for up to 14 days. Prior to overlaying, plates were UV-irradiated for 20 min.   Strains comprising the antibiotic activity test panel are listed in Table S1. Each isolate was grown in 10 ml of LB broth ( E. coli  strains) or BHI broth ( S. aureus ,  K. pneumoniae ,  A. baumannii  and  E. faecium  strains) overnight at 37 °C with aeration at 200 r.p.m. The OD at 600 nm (OD 600 ) of each culture was measured, and cultures were diluted to OD 600  0.6 in 100 ml of molten 0.6% nutrient agar. The molten agar-bacteria mixture was poured directly over the UV-irradiated test plates (~40 ml per 10×10 cm plate). Overlays were incubated overnight at 37 °C. After overnight incubation, plates were visually assessed and photographed for zones of growth inhibition.   Isolates that were positive for antimicrobial activity from the initial overlay screen were screened a second time individually, using the same protocol as above, to confirm activity. Only isolates showing antimicrobial activity in both initial and secondary screening were deemed positive for antimicrobial activity. Pooled 16S rRNA extraction and sequencing   Cells from all 1,218 isolates were pooled, and nucleic acids were extracted using the Qiagen DNeasy kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and DNA quality and concentration were assessed using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer and Qubit fluorometer (Thermo Scientific). Full-length (V1–V9) 16S amplicons were generated using the Oxford Nanopore 16S barcoding kit 24 v14 (Oxford Nanopore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing libraries were loaded onto R10.4.1 flow cells. Reads were filtered to only retain those longer than 1,400 bp and shorter than 1,700 bp to remove any non-16S sequences. Species-level taxonomy was assigned to the resulting reads by Emu [ 11 ]. Metabolite extraction from diffusion chamber isolates   For dereplication of antibacterial isolates by MS, isolates were grown on their producing media for 14 days at 28 °C, and a small (~1 cm diameter) agar plug was removed from close to the centre of the colony and transferred to a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube containing 600 µl of ethyl acetate. Plugs were sonicated in a water bath for 10 min and centrifuged at 13,000  g  for 5 min, and the supernatant was transferred into a clean 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. Supernatants were dried down in the CentriVap ®  Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco) for 15 min at 40 °C and then resuspended in 400 µl of methanol. Resuspended samples were then filtered through 1 ml syringes with 0.2 PTFE syringe filters (Thermo Scientific) into clean 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. Filtrates were kept at −20 °C prior to MS. LC-MS/MS analysis of extracted metabolites   Samples were analysed using LC-ESI-HRMS/MS on a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). A 2 µl injection volume of samples was introduced by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a Kinetex 1.7 µm EVO C18 column (1 mm×100 mm) (Phenomenex). Compounds were separated using a gradient of water/0.1% formic acid (A) and acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (B) (2% B to 100% B over 15 min) at a flow rate of 0.075 ml min −1 . Acquisition was performed in positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition and automatic switching between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisitions. Full-scan spectra (m/z 50–1500) were acquired in the time of flight, and the top ten most intense ions in a given scan were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation utilizing stepping.   Thermo .raw data files were converted to .mzXML format using MSConvert, as part of the ProteoWizard package [ 12 ], and uploaded to the GNPS server (gnps.ucsd.edu) [ 8 ]. A metadata file (.txt) comprised of sample attributes was also generated and uploaded to GNPS. Molecular networks were generated by GNPS with the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance (0.05 Da) and fragment ion mass tolerance (0.05 Da) and cosine score of at least 0.7. The resulting network was processed further using the Dereplicator [ 13 ] and Dereplicator+ [ 9 ] algorithms, as implemented in the GNPS environment, to identify known natural products. Dereplicated spectral data were visualized using Cytoscape v3.9.1 [ 14 ]. DNA extraction and whole-genome sequencing   Selected strains were cultured in 10 ml sterile ISP2 broth with aeration at 180 r.p.m. and 30 °C for at least 7 days. Cultures were centrifuged at 8,000 r.p.m. for 5 min to collect cell pellets. DNA was extracted using the magnetic bead-based GenFind v3 DNA extraction kit (Beckman Coulter). DNA was prepared for short-read sequencing using the Nextera XT sample preparation kit (Illumina) and was sequenced on a NextSeq 500 (Illumina) using 2×150 bp reads. DNA was prepared for long-read sequencing on the MinION platform (Oxford Nanopore) using the Ligation Sequencing kit. Samples were barcoded using the Rapid Barcoding Kit 96 v14 (Oxford Nanopore). Assembly, annotation and bioinformatic analysis of sequenced bacterial genomes   Genomes were assembled using Flye 2.9-b1768 (for Nanopore reads) [ 15 ] or the assembly script Shovill ( https://github.com/tseemann/shovill ), which uses the SPAdes v3.15.0 assembler [ 16 ] (for Illumina reads). All assemblies were annotated with Prokka v1.14.6 [ 17 ]. For species identification, the 16S rRNA sequences were extracted from annotated whole-genome assemblies and were searched against the rRNA/ITS database at NCBI using BLASTn. The hit with the highest percentage identity was selected as the best match. Secondary metabolite BGCs were predicted using AntiSMASH v7 ( https://antismash.secondarymetabolites.org ) [ 10 ]. BGC comparisons were visualized with Clinker v0.0.30 [ 18 ]. Nigericin analysis   Extracts from strain 10362 were prepared by growing bacteria on R2A agar plates for 14 days, cutting the agar into pieces, transferring to a clean flask and extracting with ethyl acetate (100 ml). The contents were mixed and incubated at room temperature overnight. The ethyl acetate fraction was then poured over anhydrous sodium sulphate and filtered with Whatman #1 filter paper (GE Healthcare) into a round-bottom flask. Solvent was evaporated under vacuum using a rotary evaporator (Buchi) with a water bath set at 40 °C. Dried extracts were resuspended in 1 ml HPLC-grade methanol and stored at 4 °C.   The LC chromatographic analysis was performed on 1290 Infinity III (Agilent) equipped with a reverse-phase C18 column (Kinetex 2.6 µm C18 100 Å, 75×3 mm, Phenomenex). The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C, with a flow rate of 0.5 ml min −1 . Standard nigericin and bacterial extracts were separated using a 20 min gradient composed of 100% MS-grade water (solvent A) and 100% MS-grade acetonitrile (solvent B), both containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was as follows: 0–8 min, 20% B; 8–12 min, 100% B; 12–15 min, 100% B; 15–16 min, 20% B; 16–20 min, 20% B. The LC eluent was introduced into the mass spectrometer [Revident Q-TOF (Agilent)] with a dual ESI as an ionization source, operating in positive-ion mode. Data acquisition and processing were performed using Agilent MassHunter software version B.06.00. A commercial nigericin standard (BioAustralis) was used to confirm the retention time and exact mass of nigericin and as a comparator for putative nigericin-containing extracts. Ion chromatograms were extracted for  m/z  742.5150 [M+NH 4 ] +  (calculated for C 40 H 72 NO 11 =742.51054). Determination of streptothricin production   Antibiotic plug-based assays were performed by growing strain 10258 on R2A agar plates for 14 days at 30 °C. Small plugs of mycelial growth (~0.5 cm diameter) were cored out and were placed on top of an LB agar plate that had been inoculated with either  E. coli  BW25113,  E. coli  BW25113 (pGDP1: stat ) (streptothricin-resistant) or  E. coli  BW25113 (pGDP1: uvrA ) (echinomycin-resistant) [ 19 ]. Any zones of clearing were observed and recorded. Overview of isolation, dereplication and genomic analysis procedures   A flow chart summarizing each step of the isolation, dereplication and genomic analysis is included as Fig. S2. Results   Isolation and cultivation of bacteria from microbial diffusion chambers   Based on previous reports suggesting that microbial diffusion chambers could improve bacterial recovery and provide access to novel taxa compared to standard plating techniques [ 3 , 5 ], we attempted to construct diffusion chambers to investigate bacteria present in Australian soil samples. Several types of diffusion chamber devices have been developed [ 3 , 5 ,  20 ,  21 ], and we based ours upon the method of Berdy  et al . [ 6 ], using easy-to-obtain laboratory materials including semipermeable membranes and inserts from standard tip boxes. Following the construction of the diffusion chambers, we tested whether they could increase bacterial recovery compared to standard cultivation methods. We inoculated the wells of diffusion chamber devices and miniaturized Petri dishes with the same soil bacteria/agar mixture that had been diluted to ~1 cell/100 µl of agar. Following growth for at least 3 weeks, we then counted the number of colonies present in the diffusion chamber and the Petri dishes and converted these to cells recovered per 1 ml of agar. Diffusion chambers provided superior bacterial recovery compared to plate-based cultivation, increasing colony counts by at least threefold ( Fig. 1a ).   Fig. 1. Cultivation and bioactivity data for diffusion chamber isolated bacteria. ( a ) Comparison of diffusion chambers to the standard cultivation method shows an increase in bacterial recovery using diffusion chambers. ( b ) Sankey plot showing diversity of isolated bacteria, as estimated from bulk, full-length 16S rRNA sequencing. ( c ) Venn diagram showing numbers of isolated bacteria exhibiting antibiotic activity against antibiotic-sensitive  S. aureus  Newman or  E. coli  DH10B. Arrows point to the number of strains from each subset that were active against one or more Gram-positive or Gram-negative multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens. ( d ) Upset plot showing the number of isolates that exhibited bioactivity against one or more multidrug-resistant pathogens. MRSA, methicillin-resistant  S. aureus ; VRE, vancomycin-resistant  E. faecium ; AB,  A. baumannii ; KP,  K. pneumoniae ; MDREc, multidrug-resistant  E. coli .     Open in a new tab Based on these results, we used diffusion chambers to attempt to recover bacteria from soil samples. From 10 different soil samples, we isolated a total of 1,218 bacterial isolates using diffusion chambers. Following incubation in their respective soil samples, bacterial microcolonies were visible within the wells of the diffusion chambers within 14 days, and the isolated organisms exhibited a wide variety of morphologies upon purity plating. To rapidly gain an insight into the diversity of the isolated bacteria, we performed bulk long-read 16S rRNA sequencing on all isolates. Amplification, sequencing and subsequent deconvolution of the 16S rRNA gene sequences through the Emu pipeline [ 11 ] revealed 242 non-redundant sequences from 5 bacterial phyla, corresponding to 10 different classes and 32 different families ( Fig. 1b ). At the genus level, 61 different genera were identified, including genera that are commonly found in soil, such as  Streptomyces  and  Bacillus . Although our bulk sequencing strategy did not reveal the identity of every isolated organism, ~20% of our cultivated isolates were identified, which was sufficient to show that diverse organisms from a range of phyla and families can be isolated using diffusion chambers. Antibiotic activity of diffusion chamber-derived bacteria   Given that most of our current antibiotics have been identified from soil bacteria, we sought to determine the extent of antimicrobial production in our isolated bacteria. We tested our collection for antibiotic activity against an antibiotic-sensitive preliminary Gram-positive and Gram-negative test set ( S. aureus  and  E. coli , respectively, Table S1). Of the 1,218 isolated bacteria, 197 were found to have any antibacterial activity (16%), with 38 isolates showing broad-spectrum activity, 150 showing only anti- S. aureus  activity and 9 showing only anti- E. coli  activity ( Fig. 1c ). Isolates displaying antibacterial activity against drug-sensitive strains were then tested for their ability to inhibit antibiotic-resistant pathogens, including methicillin-resistant  S. aureus  (MRSA),  K. pneumoniae ,  Acinetobacter baumannii ,  E. coli  and vancomycin-resistant  E. faecium  (VRE). Of the 197 isolates exhibiting activity against either of the antibiotic-sensitive organisms, 115 isolates (58% of antibiotic-producing bacteria) inhibited at least 1 multidrug-resistant pathogen. The majority of these isolates had activity against MRSA and/or VRE, while inhibitors of any of the Gram-negative MDR pathogens were relatively rare ( Fig. 1d ). Of those with broad-spectrum activity in our initial screen, only one was capable of inhibiting all test strains, while the majority of strains with anti- S. aureus  activity in the initial screen were capable of inhibiting either MRSA and/or VRE (94 of 150, 63%). For those strains with only initial anti- E. coli  activity, three isolates were identified that could inhibit any one or more of the multidrug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens. Dereplication of antibiotic-producing isolates   With the large number of antibiotic-producing bacteria that were isolated, we sought to rapidly identify any known antibiotics produced by these organisms. To this end, we attempted dereplication by collection of HR-ESI-LC-MS/MS spectra for each isolate exhibiting antibiotic activity and comparing these data against known spectra. Initially, we collected mass spectral data for 192 isolates and compared these spectra to those from known molecules using the GNPS tool [ 8 , 22 ]. GNPS generates a molecular network where nodes represent ions detected by a mass spectrometer and edges connect molecules with similar MS/MS fragmentation spectra, suggestive of similar molecular structures. Within the GNPS suite of tools, Dereplicator and Dereplicator+ [ 9 , 13 ] directly compare the uploaded spectra to a curated set of reference spectra. Doing so allowed the identification of a presumptive known natural product in 65 isolates (33% of the tested strains).   The most commonly identified antibiotic was actinomycin D (also known as dactinomycin), which was found by GNPS in extracts from 12 of the 65 dereplicated isolates. The majority of actinomycin D-producing isolates were also found to produce the related congener actinomycin X2 (also known as actinomycin V). Both molecules are known to have antibiotic activity against Gram-positive bacteria, which correlates well with the results of the bioactivity assays for their producing strains (Table S2). Eleven strains were found to produce antibiotics from the nonactin group of compounds, including bonactin, nonactin, dinactin and trinactin, all of which are also known to have antibiotic activity against Gram-positive bacteria [ 23 ]. Valinomycin was another commonly identified antibiotic (produced by ten isolates) and was found to be produced by four strains that also produced nonactin compounds. Other less commonly identified antibiotics included pyrromycin (produced by six isolates), echinomycin (one isolate) and novobiocin (one isolate). Although we did not test specifically for activity against eukaryotic cells in this study, GNPS identified several known antifungal and antitumour compounds in the extracts of 30 strains, including manumycin (14 isolates), antimycin (9 isolates), montanastatin (7 isolates), tambromycins (5 isolates) and venturicidin (1 isolate). This analysis shows that we were able to isolate bacteria producing a wide range of bioactive molecules and to use MS to dereplicate molecules from 65 isolates ( Fig. 2 ).   Fig. 2. Selected dereplicated compounds detected in ethyl acetate extracts of diffusion chamber-derived isolates. The GNPS-derived molecular network shows known compounds and their derivatives as molecular families (all nodes joined together within a subnetwork represent a molecular family). Known molecules are shown, and their background is colour-coded according to the subnetwork seen in the diagram.     Open in a new tab Genomic analysis of selected producing isolates for known BGCs   Although MS-based dereplication was able to putatively identify a wide range of antibiotic molecules, using this type of dereplication in isolation may result in false-positive identifications. Correlation of the biosynthesis genes responsible for the production of known molecules provides confidence that MS-based identifications are real. In addition, for strains where antibiotics were not detected by GNPS, analysis of genomes may reveal genes for the biosynthesis of antibiotics that were undetectable by MS or not extracted by our choice of solvent.   To investigate the presence of biosynthetic genes for the actinomycin family of molecules, we sequenced the genomes of several producers (Table S3), as the BGC responsible for these compounds is well characterized and should be readily identifiable from genome assemblies. Following genome sequencing and annotation of four actinomycin-producing isolates ( Streptomyces murinus  10260,  Streptomyces antibioticus  M126,  S. murinus  10202 and  S. murinus  10256, Table S3), assembled genomes were analysed using AntiSMASH v7 [ 10 ], a bioinformatic tool to identify secondary metabolite BGCs directly from genome-level data. This analysis identified the actinomycin BGC in all four genomes. To determine the extent of actinomycin BGC conservation among our isolates, a comparative analysis was performed with the reference actinomycin BGC from MIBiG [ 24 ] (accession BGC0000296.5). This analysis showed that the majority of genes were highly conserved among all actinomycin BGCs ( Fig. 3 ). However, the BGCs in strains 10202 and 10256 contained the insertion of an additional four to six genes directly downstream of the  acmM  orthologue, which encodes a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (Table S4). In addition, the reference actinomycin BGC from  Streptomyces anulatus  (previously  Streptomyces chrysomall