>Materials and methods   Patient cohorts   The study was designed in accordance with the rules of Good Clinical Practice and with the ethical principles established in the Declaration of Helsinki. The cohort of patients used in this study was previously described 11 , comprising heart transplant patients with and without severe primary graft dysfunction (PGD) using ISHLT criteria 13  matched by gender and age. Patient serum samples were prospectively recruited at Columbia University Irving Medical Center (Columbia) between 2014 and 2016. Patient serum samples were retrospectively collected from biobanks at Cedars-Sinai hospital (Cedars) and Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital (Paris). Patients undergoing re-transplant were excluded. For 81 patients, a single serum sample was provided and analyzed. Seven patients from the Paris cohort had two serum samples provided and all expression and prediction analyses averaged the protein quantities of those two samples. Human subjects protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Columbia University, Cedars Sinai and Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital and patients provided informed consent. Patient characteristics were collected including demographics, biometrics, labs, medications and hemodynamics. We derived the MELD-XI score for each patient using the formula: 3.78 × ln[serum bilirubin (mg/dL)] + 9.57 × ln[serum creatinine (mg/dL)] + 6.43 13 .   We performed a multivariate logistic regression model to determine significance of each clinical characteristic’s association to patient survival amongst all clinical characteristics. For characteristics missing in less than a third of patients, we imputed the most frequent value or the average value, for binary/categorical and numeric characteristics respectively. The patient cohort table was constructed using custom Python and R scripts using the tableone R package. Mass spectrometry analysis   Total microvesicle was isolated from 100 μl of serum using an optimized protocol based on a commercial total microvesicle isolation kit from Life Technologies Inc. (ThermoFisher Total Exosome Isolation from Serum, 4478360), specifically including an incubation step at 4 degrees (Step 3) and a resuspension volume of 25 µl (Step 6). Samples were homogenized using MS-compatible lysis buffer (4 M Urea/50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate/protease inhibitor & phosphatase inhibitor). 20 μg of lysate from each sample was proteolytically cleaved with trypsin and chemically labeled with mass spectrometer detectable quantification reagent, TMT10plex isobaric mass tags separately 14 – 16 . Sample preparation quality control was performed by TMT labels checking and tryptic digestion efficiency (100 ng of each sample was pooled, desalted, and analyzed by short SPS-MS3 method, and using normalization factor, samples were bulk mixed at 1:1 across all channels). Quality control to check LC–MS performance was performed using Pierce™ HeLa Digest/PRTC Standard (Catalog number: A47997) and Pierce™ TMT11plex Yeast Digest Standard (Catalog number: A40938).   A reference sample was generated by pooling equal amounts of serum microvesicles from each patient to create a common protein library for quantification. Samples were bulk mixed at 1:1 across all channels and bulk mixed samples were fractionated using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific). Each fraction was dried down in a speed-vac and dissolved in a solution of 2% acetonitrile/2% formic acid. Each fraction was injected in triplicate on Oribitrap Fusion coupled with the UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific). Fractionated peptides were separated from the self-made 25 cm column (Resprosil-C18, 2.4 mm, 25 cm × 75 mm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a non-linear flow rate of 300 nl/min using a gradient of 5–30% of buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) for 70 min with a temperature of the column maintained at 40 °C during the entire experiment. The full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) at a resolution of 120,000. The 10 most intense MS1 ions were selected for MS2 analysis. The isolation width was set at 0.7 Da and isolated precursors were fragmented by CID at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and analyzed in the ion trap using “turbo” scan speed. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 scan was collected on the top 10 most intense ions in the MS2 spectrum. SPS-MS3 precursors were fragmented by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at an NCE of 60% and analyzed using the Orbitrap. Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 to perform database search and TMT reporter ions quantification. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+ 229.163 Da) and the carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.021 Da) was set as static modifications, while the oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.995 Da), deamidation (+ 0.984) on asparagine and glutamine were set as a variable modification. Data were searched against a UniProt human database with peptide-spectrum match (PSMs) and protein-level at 1% FDR. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of each protein were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. The results obtained from PD2.2 were further analyzed as described below. Protein expression analysis   We calculated a differential protein expression signature between survived and expired patient samples, as previously described 11 . The protein association calculated was used as the differential rank statistic for pathway analysis using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) 12 .   All the statistical analyses were done in the Python programming language (Python Software Foundation. Python Language Reference, version 3.7. Available at  http://www.python.org ). The software platform STRING investigated cellular component enrichment of the identified proteins.   The difference in protein expression distributions between the prospective and retrospective cohorts was tested with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov 2-sample test. The protein expression distribution deviation from normality test is from D’Agostino’s and Pearson’s test, where normality of a distribution is rejected at an alpha level p-value of 0.05. Both methods are from the python package  Scipy . We calculated a differential protein expression signature between survived and expired patient samples. To estimate association of individual protein levels to survival, we calculated L1-regularized logistic regression models for each protein with the sites-of-origin as covariates. We performed 200 bootstraps (samples with replacement) of the models to determine a confidence interval for the protein expression association to survival. The average of the bootstrap distribution for each protein was used as the differential rank statistic.   For 81 patients, a single serum sample was provided and analyzed. Seven patients from the Paris cohort had two serum samples provided, resulting in 95 total samples. We examined whether the additional samples were more correlated in the expression of the 181 proteins. Thus, we computed 95 choose 2 or 4465 pairwise (spearman) correlations across 181 proteins. Only 71 (1.6%) had a spearman correlation over 0.5, where 13 included a technical replicate. The variability in sample expression suggests technical replicates are not likely to inflate protein expression differences for patient survival. For the analysis, we averaged together protein values between the two replicates of the 7 samples resulting in one sample for each of the 88 patients for downstream analysis.   Pathway analysis was conducted using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) 12 . The GSEA algorithm employed was from the python package  gseapy  version 0.9.15. The pathway and function gene lists used in our GSEA analysis were ‘GO_Biological_Process_2017b’, 'GO_Molecular_Function_2017b', 'GO_Cellular_Component_2017b', 'Reactome_2016', 'WikiPathways_2019_Human', ‘'KEGG_2019_Human', which are all in the gseapy package hosted on its website ( https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/#stats ). The statistics generated by the GSEA algorithm is detailed in the user guide ( https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/doc/GSEAUserGuideFrame.html ). Briefly, the Normalized Enrichment Score (NES) provides a gene set enrichment compared to all permutations of the gene set enrichments for the protein expression data. The NES can be interpreted as the gene set enrichment score corrected for the size of the gene set and spurious, un-interesting correlations between the gene sets and the expression dataset. The p-value estimates the probability of seeing an enrichment score as high or higher among the permutation distribution, and the false discovery rate (FDR) estimates the probability that an enrichment score with a given NES is a false positive finding. The leading edge (ledge) genes are the genes from the pathway gene set with the highest impact on the signal generated for the biological process. Survival prediction   The prediction scheme, Monte Carlo Cross Validation (MCCV), is comprised of the following steps repeated 200 times 11 , 17 :     Split the data into 85% training and 15% validation sets.   Separately normalize, or subtract the sample mean and divide by the sample standard deviation, the training and testing data.   Using only the sampled training data, compute tenfold cross validation and choose the top performing model parameters for predicting survival status.   Refit the training dataset using the top-prediction model parameters determined in step 3.   Predict the survival status of the patients in the yet-to-be-seen validation set using the refit model calculated in step 4.     Specifically, we begin by computing 200 randomized training/validation data splits for the prediction steps outlined above (step 1). We performed normalization (step 2; min–max scaling within the training and validation sets, separately) on the clinical and proteomic data separately for the training and validation data. Within each of the 200 randomized training/validation data splits, we used tenfold cross validation (within the training set only) to optimize model parameters and perform feature selection (step 3). Using the chosen parameters and features, we then train on the entire training set (step 4) and use this model to predict survival status on the validation set (step 5). The survival prediction probabilities were compared to the true survival status to compute the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), and other metrics. The AUROC values reported in this paper are calculated using the validation set patient probabilities. Bootstrapping analysis on the validation patient probabilities (N = 50 samples with replacement) resulted in a population distribution for prediction performances, and feature importance (beta coefficient) was extracted within each bootstrap before prediction on the validation set. A permutation analysis was similarly performed, with random labeling of survival status in patients, to generate and test from a distribution of prediction metrics from random survival assignment. Comparison of the bootstrap and permutation prediction distributions allows for prediction and feature importance comparisons between real and randomly distributed data while accounting for over-fitting during these prediction tasks. We evaluated the significance of each marker to predict patient survival by comparing the 200 feature importance values from the bootstrap and the permutation prediction distributions. The p-values generated in this comparison represent protein marker prediction in our cohort compared with random patient survival. We tested differences in the bootstrap and permutation distributions with the 2-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.   We note that our methodology permits prediction of death as well as survival. In this case, the machine learning models produce higher probabilities for expired patients which result in AUROC values less than 0.5, which is often regarded as a random prediction. Our MCCV methodology samples these patient probabilities to derive an AUROC performance metric and confidence interval. The calculated marker performances are representative of the model’s confidence in predicting patient survival.   We performed several binary schemes to evaluate our predictive results. The main analysis included the binary prediction of post-transplant survival where the patient did not die after transplantation (all-time survival). We also included covariates in the logistic regression model, such as site-of-origin and post-transplant PGD indicators. Finally, we predicted post-transplant survival within 1-year where patients were labelled as survived as long as they did not die within 1 year of heart transplantation. Discussion   In an imbalanced system of limited organ availability and increasing need, risk prediction has the potential to improve organ utilization. Assessment of recipient candidacy is a critical part of all transplant evaluations and involves a thorough analysis of both the recipient and the donor. Inherent in this process is an understanding of what generates that risk and importantly, whether that risk can be modified. The premise of this study is to focus on the pre-transplant recipient and explore the circulating molecular markers using exosome proteomics with the goal of discovering new post-transplant risk factors. Underlying this is the hypothesis that some amount of post-transplant risk is predicated on molecular factors within the recipient that are present at the time of transplant and can be estimated reliably prior to transplant.   We used our Monte-Carlo Cross Validation technique to estimate the variance in post-transplant survival amongst a modest cohort of patients with varying clinical characteristics. In our survival analysis, several proteins were identified as predictive of post-transplant mortality and nearly all were involved in the KKS. The KKS is an enzymatic cascade that produces a number of different bioreactive small molecules involved in inflammation, vasodilation and coagulation and is antagonized by the renin-angiotensin system 18 . At the initiation of the cascade, kininogen is converted into its active kinins including vasoreactive small molecules bradykinin (from high molecular weight kininogen) and kallidin (from low molecular weight kininogen) 19 . Both bradykinin and kallidin signal through the bradykinin receptor and cause vasodilation and the release of nitric oxide and prostacyclins 20 . Kallikrein also activates the intrinsic cascade by proteolytic activation of coagulation factor XII 21 . Peptidases such as angiotensin converting enzymes (ACE) downregulate this pathway by proteolytic degradation of bradykinin and kallidin 22 , 23 .   Pathway analysis from differential protein expression associated with survival was shifted towards higher levels of components in the coagulation cascade and away from vasoreactive signaling with low molecular weight kininogen. Multiple components of the coagulation cascade were found to be upregulated. Factor IX and Factor II (thrombin) are key enzymes of the intrinsic and common pathways respectively. SERPINF2 or alpha-2-antiplasmin is a serine protease inhibitor that cleaves and inactivates plasmin, an enzyme responsible for the dissolution of fibrin-based clotting 24 . Carboxypeptidases such as CPB2 are activated by thrombin and both inactivate plasmin stabilizing fibrin clots and inhibit inflammations likely through metabolization of complement and pro-inflammatory cytokines 25 – 28 . In contrast to the elevated levels of these pro-coagulation components, diminished levels of low molecular weight kininogen predicted survival. These results raise the possibility of a pro-inflammatory and vasodilatory state prior to transplant among patients who go on to have a poor outcome.   The transplant patients in this study were comprised for a cohort initially matched for primary graft dysfunction as previously reported 11 . This enriched the mortality of the cohort but at the same time potentially introduced PGD as a confounder given PGD’s association with mortality. When we use PGD as a covariate in our analyses, prediction is improved for most protein markers and overall, there is no significant correlation between prediction metrics for PGD and survival in our analyses. The underlying cause of PGD is not known and its connection to mortality is not mechanistically understood. Thus, the molecular processes lead to PGD may be shared with overall mortality and in our previous analysis of PGD prediction, we identified plasma kallikrein, a component of the KKS, as predictive of PGD. Plasma kallikrein however was not predictive of survival in this analysis. Furthermore, out of the 16 proteins predictive of PGD and the 7 proteins predictive of survival after transplant, only F2 was significant in both analyses. Still, there remains the possibility that dysregulation of the KKS prior to transplant is a unified predictor for poor post-transplant outcomes and how PGD and survival are linked molecularly remains to be delineated.   There are several limitations to the study. Foremost is the small sample size which reduces our power of detecting significant associations and predictions. Through proteomics we are able to construct a high dimensional data set with only a modest number of patients however it remains to be seen whether these predictive proteins are applicable to the larger transplant population. Though the training and testing set were derived from three different institutions, further external validation and prospective analysis of the KKS and individual component biomarkers prior to transplant is required. We also do not take into account donor or organ characteristics that may influence risk. Pre-transplant risk stratification is often done well in advance of a transplant. However, the ability to risk stratify with novel protein biomarkers raises the possibility of generating usable donor-recipient risk pairing in which matching an organ takes into account molecular compatibility anchored in both mechanistic and empiric data. This will require careful prospective and broad biomarker characterization of donors and recipient pairs along with longitudinal outcomes. Lastly, the mass spectrometry results are semi quantitative and thus are not able to definitively provide absolute concentrations of these biomarkers per sample. Utilization of these results will require further characterization and validation of these biomarkers using facile quantitative measurement such as through ELISA that can be more readily deployed in the clinical setting.   In summary, this study expands the pool of potential transplant biomarkers associated with transplant survival using microvesicle proteomics. We found SERPINF2, F9, and LK were able to predict survival independent of PGD status with AUROC > 0.6. Pathway analysis revealed that survival was associated with platelet activation and shift in the kallikrein kinin system away from vasodilation and towards coagulation. Prospective studies investigating the KKS prior to transplant are needed to validate these findings with the goal improving transplant outcomes. Supplementary Information     Supplementary Information.  (520.6KB, docx)    Acknowledgements   This paper is dedicated to the patients who participated in the study. We would like to acknowledge Emily Chen, Purvi Patel and the Herbert Irving Cancer Center mass spectrometry core facility with their work in obtaining proteomic data. Author contributions   N.P.G., N.P.T. and B.M.F. designed the study. Mass spectrometry proteomics performed by R.K.S. Data analysis performed by N.P.G. and N.P.T. Serum samples collected by G.L., S.R., E.Z., P.L., J.K. and B.M.F. Clinical data collected by G.L., J.P. and M.J.F. Institutional support provided by P.C.C., P.L. and J.K. N.P.G., N.P.T., and B.M.F. wrote the manuscript. Funding   This study was supported by the NIH through UL1 TR001873 and K08HL140201 to B.M.F and an R35GM131905 award to N.P.T. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. Data availability   All code for the analyses can be found on the following website:  https://github.com/ngiangre/kng1_analysis . We included a versioned release of our code at  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6969703  and at the  https://github.com/ngiangre/kng1_analysis/tree/2.0.0 . The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD031426. Competing interests   The authors declare no competing interests. Footnotes     Publisher's note   Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.   Supplementary Information   The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-022-18573-2. References       1. Chambers DC, et al.  The International Thoracic Organ Transplant Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: 37th adult lung transplantation report—2020; focus on deceased donor characteristics. J. Hear. Lung Transplant. 2020;39(10):1016–1027. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2020.07.009.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     2. Lyu DM, Goff RR, Chan KM. The lung allocation score and its relevance. Semin. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2021;42(3):346–356. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1729541.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3. OPTN/UNOS, “KDPI Calculator.” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2016.       4. Aleksova N, et al.  Risk prediction models for survival after heart transplantation: A systematic review. Am. J. Transplant. 2020;20(4):1137–1151. doi: 10.1111/ajt.15708.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     5. Jasseron C, et al.  Optimization of heart allocation: The transplant risk score. Am. J. Transplant. 2019;19(5):1507–1517. doi: 10.1111/ajt.15201.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     6. Raposo G, Stoorvogel W. Extracellular vesicles: Exosomes, microvesicles, and friends. J. Cell Bi