>Methods   Cell culture and treatment   HMEC from different donors were provided by Lonza and hTERT-immortalized HMECT generated within 2–3 passages of primary HMEC culture. HMEC and HMECT were grown in Mammary Epithelial Cell Growth Medium (MECGM, Promocell) supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies). 293GP (Clonotech) cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Eurobio) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were thawed, amplified, and frozen upon receipt. The experiments were performed on the aliquots within a month. Cells were maintained at 37 °C under a 5% CO 2  atmosphere. TGFβ (PeproTech) was used at the concentration of 0.5 ng/mL. TNFα (PeproTech) was used at the concentration of 20 ng/mL. Retroviral transduction   The retroviral vectors used were pBABEhygro/hTERT (Addgene plasmid # 1773) [ 19 ], pWZLneo/RPS6KA2 (pWZL/RSK3) (Addgene plasmid # 20621) [ 20 ], pFLAG-CMV2/RSK3 [ 21 ], pBABE-puro-IκBα-mut super repressor (Addgene plasmid # 15291) [ 20 ], LPCX/SMAD2 (Addgene plasmid # 12636) [ 22 ], LPCX/SMAD3 (Addgene plasmid # 12638) [ 22 ], pBABE-puro-SMAD4 (Addgene plasmid # 37041) [ 23 ] together with their empty vector counterparts as controls. pWZL/RSK3 mutants were generated using the QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit according to the manufacturer’s recommendations (Agilent Technologies), using the following primers for RSK3 K100R mutant: forward AGGGCTTTGAGAAGGCAGATC, reverse TCCAGGATCAGGTAGAGCTTTC or for RSK3 K464R: forward CAGTTACACGGGAACAACATC and reverse CATCAGCTCCATTACCAGGTAC and they were sequenced prior to usage (Genewiz). Virus-producing 293GP cells were transfected with vectors using GeneJuice reagent according to the manufacturer’s recommendations (Merck Millipore). Cells were transfected with VSVg (1 µg) and retroviral vector of interest (5 µg). Two days after transfection, the viral supernatant was mixed with fresh medium (1/2) and hexadimethrine bromide (8 μg/mL; Sigma‐Aldrich), and was then used to infect target cells for 6 h. One day after infection, selection started using puromycin at 500 ng/mL or/and neomycin at 100 μg/mL. Kinase library screen   The Myristoylated Kinase Library (Addgene) was used. All plasmids were prepared and used in separate wells. HMECT were seeded in 96-well plates at 2 × 10 3  cells/well and infected 24 h after, one kinase per well. Twenty-four hours later cells were treated with TGFβ. 72 h after treatment cells were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde and stained with Hoechst 33342 nucleic acid stain. Plates were read with Cytell cell imaging system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and then ranked by nuclei count. Crystal violet assay   The cells were plated at a density of 1 × 10 4  cells/well in 6-well plates. Seven to ten days after treatment, the cells were rinsed with PBS, fixed with paraformaldehyde 3.7% for 15 min, washed and stained with Crystal Violet Solution 0.05%. Senescence associated-β-galactosidase activity   SA-β-Gal activity was carried out in 6-well plates at a density of 1 × 10 4  cells/well. To measure the activity, cells were rinsed with PBS and fixed with Fixation Solution β-Gal (Glutaraldehyde 0.5%) for 5 min and incubated with the SA-β-Gal solution (40 mM citric acid, 5 mM K4[Fe(CN)6] 3H 2 O, 5 mM K3[Fe(CN)6, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl 2  6H 2 O, X-gal (20 mg/mL)) overnight at 37 °C. At least 100 cells were counted for each condition. EdU staining   Proliferation assay was performed in 96-well plates with 1,500 cells/well. Cells were stained according to the manufacturer’s protocol with Click-iT Reaction Cocktail (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Wells were imaged with an Operetta High-Content Imaging System (PerkinElmer) and analyzed with Columbus software (PerkinElmer), to calculate the number of cells and the percentage of proliferating cells. RNA extraction, reverse transcription and quantitative PCR   NucleoZol (Macherey–Nagel) was used to perform phenol–chloroform extraction of RNA, and the RNA concentration was measured using NanoDropTM One/OneC (Ozyme). The Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fischer Scientific) was used for cDNA synthesis from 1 µg RNA. The RT mixture was diluted 1/10 and used for qPCR analysis. TaqMan mix or ONEGreen® Fast qPCR Premix (Ozyme) was used to perform qPCR with an FX96 Thermocycler (Bio-Rad). All reactions were performed in duplicate. The amount of mRNA was calculated with Ct (ΔΔCT) method and normalized against GAPDH. Primers (intron spanning) are listed in Supplemental Table  1 . Transcriptome and GSEA analysis   Transcriptome analysis was performed using the Human GE 4 × 44 K v2 Microarray (Agilent Technologies) and the one-color gene expression Agilent workflow. Briefly, total RNA was extracted from HMECTs with the Nucleospin RNA kit (Macherey–Nagel) and RNA quality was checked using Tapestation (Agilent Technologies). cRNAs were then synthesized and labeled with Cy3 dye from 100 ng of total RNA using the one-color Low Input Quick Amp Labeling Kit (Agilent Technologies). After labeling and quality control validation, 1650 ng of Cy3-labeled cRNAs were hybridized to the 4 × 44 K arrays for 17 h at 65 °C. Microarrays were washed and scanned with an Agilent DNA microarray scanner G2565CA (Agilent Technologies). Fluorescent signals were extracted using Feature Extraction Software (version 10.5.1.1; Agilent Technologies) and transferred to Genespring GX 12.6 software (Agilent Technologies) for data processing and data mining. Data were normalized in Genespring using the 75 th  percentile method. Microarray probes were filtered using the Agilent flag filter to remove probes with a raw signal below 10 in all replicates and for all conditions tested. For each condition, three independent replicates were analyzed and the average log2 fold change for all of the genes were determined in tested conditions compared to control conditions. Datasets are available in GEO  GSE243320 .   For GSEA analysis, all genes were ranked by their log2 fold-change expression according to the microarray data, in a condition of interest compared to its control condition. These ranked expression files were used for Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using the pre-ranked method of the GSEA v2.0.13 software with default parameters. Gene sets were obtained from the GSEA Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) ( www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/ ). Western blot   Proteins were extracted with 2X Laemmli buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE in Tris–HCl-Glycine-SDS TGS pH 8.5 (Euromedex). Proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (BioRad) in Tris–Glycine pH 8.5 Buffer (Euromedex). The membranes were blocked for 1 h with milk 5% TBS-T 0.05%, and then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies (Supplemental Table  2 ) in TBS-T milk 2.5%. Membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies (Supplemental Table  2 ) for 1 h at room temperature in TBS-T milk 2.5%. Pierce ECL Western blotting substrate (Life Technologies) or Clarity Max ECL substrate kit (Bio-Rad) was used for signal detection. Immunofluorescence   Cells were plated at 1.5 × 10 3  cells/well in Cell Carrier 96-well plates (PerkinElmer), fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde 5 days after treatment with TGFβ, then permeabilized with Triton, and blocked with 20% FBS. The plates were incubated with the primary antibodies (Supplemental Table  2 ) overnight at 4 °C. The plates were rinsed three times with PBS-Tween and incubated with secondary antibodies (Supplemental Table  2 ) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Finally, the plates were co-stained with Hoechst (1/1,000 in PBS) for 10 min in the dark. Images were acquired with Operetta and analyzed using Columbus software (PerkinElmer). Immunoprecipitation   293GP cells were transfected with pFLAG-CMV2 or pFLAG-CMV2/RSK3, and 48 h later collected for immunoprecipitation. 2 × 10 8  293GP cells were extracted with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5% NP-40, 200 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol), and protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free; Roche), quantified using the Protein Quantification Assay (Macherey–Nagel) and incubated overnight at 4 °C on the wheel with Anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma). Samples were eluted with 3XFlag peptide (Sigma) or Laemmli buffer and visualized by Western blotting. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses   Proteins eluted from the co-immunoprecipitation experiments (three replicates from FLAG-RSK3 expressing cells and three replicates from negative control cells) were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and stacked at the top of a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Bio-Rad), the proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega), as previously described [ 24 ]. The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled with MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 90 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a pre-column (300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm × 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, 20210624 download) and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (bovine albumin, keratins, trypsin, etc.). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software [ 25 ] was used for compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1%  65 , and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group). Proline was then used to perform a MS1 quantification of the identified protein groups based on razor and specific peptides.   Statistical analysis was performed using the ProStaR software [ 26 ]. Proteins identified in the contaminant database, and proteins identified by MS/MS and quantified in less than three replicates of one condition were discarded. After log2 transformation, abundance values were normalized by condition using variance stabilizing normalization, before missing value imputation (slsa algorithm for partially observed values in the condition and DetQuantile algorithm for totally absent values in the condition). Statistical testing was then conducted using limma, whereby differentially expressed proteins were sorted out using a fold change cut-off of 5 and a  p -value cut-off of 0.01, leading to a FDR inferior to 1% according to the Benjamini–Hochberg estimator.   The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been added to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [ 27 ] partner repository with the following dataset identifier PXD045450 and 10.6019/PXD045450.   To determine biological processes in which RSK3 partners are involved mass spectrometry results were analyzed with the DAVID online tool ( https://david.ncifcrf.gov/ ) [ 28 ]. Proteasome analysis   Proteasome activity assay was performed in HMECT infected with pWZL or pWZL /RSK3 vector and selected for one week with neomycin. Cells were plated in 96-well plates at 5 × 10 3  cells/well and analyzed with Cell-based Proteasome-Glo Chymotrypsin-like assay (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The plates were read using a plate reader (Infinite M1000 Pro, Tecan). Proteasome enrichment assay was performed on 2 × 10 7  HMECT using the Cyclex Proteasome enrichment and activity kit (MBL Life science CY-7002) and visualized by Western blot. Intraductal transplantation method   The intraductal xenograft model was carried out as previously described [ 29 ,  30 ]. Briefly, 10-week-old virgin female SCID mice were anesthetized (2% isofluorane, 2 L/min air), nipples of both inguinal glands #4 were snipped and 1.5 × 104 MCF10DCIS.com cells in 2 μl phosphate-buffered saline were injected in each gland. Mice were sacrificed between 4 and 5 weeks after injection by cervical dislocation. Immediately after being euthanized, mammary glands were excised and processed for further study. The animal facility was granted approval (C-75–12-01) given by the French Administration. Histological and immunofluorescence analysis of mouse tissue sections   Whole-mount carmine and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of tissue sections were performed as described in [ 31 ]. After whole mount staining, image acquisition was performed with an A1R Nikon confocal binocular microscope. To retrieve antigens on paraffin embedded tissue samples, sections were incubated for 20 min in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer, pH 6.0 at 90 °C. Then, after 60 min incubation in 5% fetal calf serum, sections were incubated overnight with diluted primary antibodies, washed and further incubated for 2 h at room temperature with appropriate secondary antibodies. Quantification was performed from 9 to 23 images of tumor sections from two to three different mammary glands. Statistical analysis   Statistical analysis was performed and graphs were created with Graph Pad Prism 9.4.1 and statistical test used are directly indicated in the figure legends. Data were normalized against the mean value of controls of each experiment. Results   RSK3 inhibits human mammary epithelial cell senescence induced by TGFβ   In order to identify kinases that may impact TGFβ-induced senescence, we performed a genetic screen using a viral expression library of 192 active kinases [ 20 ] in hTERT-immortalized HMECs we have generated from several donors (HMECT). Kinases were overexpressed in separate wells containing HMECT cells, and the following day, cells were treated with TGFβ. The number of nuclei was counted two days after to obtain a list of kinases potentially inhibiting TGFβ-induced senescence (Fig.  1 A and Supplemental Table  3 ). PIP5K1B, ACVR1, SGK, TK1, CHEK1, CSNK1G2, CDK4, PAPSS1, RPS6KA2, OXSR1 were identified as the top 10 hits. Finally, validation experiments confirmed that RPS6KA2 (Ribosomal Protein S6 Kinase) or RSK3 as a potential inhibitor of TGFβ-induced senescence. This kinase belongs to the RSK family of serine/threonine kinases that regulate diverse cellular processes, including cell survival and proliferation in cancer cells [ 32 ], albeit it has never been linked to senescence or TGFβ. This initial result was further confirmed after validation of the constitutive expression of the RSK3 protein (Fig.  1 B), which largely rescued the decreased cell density induced by TGFβ (Fig.  1 C). In addition, RSK3 partly prevented loss of EdU incorporation (Supplemental Figure  1 A), loss of the Ki67 proliferation marker (Supplemental Figure  1 B) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CDKN1A increase (Supplemental Figure  1 C), induced by TGFβ treatment. Transcriptomic analyses and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) also demonstrated that the decreased molecular signatures linked to proliferation arrest (Kegg Cell Cycle and Hallmark E2F targets) induced by TGFβ were largely prevented upon RSK3 expression (Fig.  1 D), also supporting that RSK3 inhibits TGFβ-induced proliferation arrest. RSK3 expression also decreased other marks of cellular senescence induced by TGFβ: SASP components expression (Fig.  1 E) and senescence-associated-β-galactosidase activity (SA-β-Gal) (Fig.  1 F).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   RSK3 inhibits TGFβ-induced senescence.  A  Schematic diagram of the genetic screen used. hTERT-immortalized human mammary epithelial cells (HMECT) were seeded in 96-well plates and infected with one kinase per well ( n  = 2 per kinase). After 24 h, cells were treated with TGFβ, and 72 h later cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 nucleic acid stain. Plates were read under a Cytell system and ranked according to the nuclei count.  B - F  HMECT were infected with pWZL/RSK3 (RSK3) or control vector pWZL (Ctrl), selected for 1 week with neomycin and plated for indicated assays, followed by TGFβ treatment (TGFβ) or not (NT).  B  Western blot validation of RSK3 overexpression.  C  Crystal violet assay for cell density 10 days after treatment with TGFβ (representative of 5 experiments).  D  GSEA enrichment plots related to cell proliferation. GSEA has been done on transcriptome data comparing global gene expression between TGFβ-treated HMECT-pWZL and non-treated HMECT-pWZL conditions (Ctrl TGFβ vs NT) or TGFβ-treated HMECT-pWZL/RSK3 and TGFβ-treated HMECT-pWZL conditions (RSK3 TGFβ vs Ctrl TGFβ). For each condition three independent experiments have been analyzed by transcriptomic ( n  = 3). False Discovery Rate (FDR) pValue and Normalized Enrichment Score (NES) are indicated.  E  RT-QPCR was performed 5 days after TGFβ treatment ( n  = 4 independent experiments).  F  SA-β-Gal assay, 7 days after treatment with TGFβ ( n  = 5 independent experiments). Scale bar = 50 μM.  G  Domains of RSK3 and mutated sites to generate kinase-deficient mutants are represented. Two kinase domain mutants were generated.  H  HMECT were infected with pWZL/RSK3 (RSK3), pWZL/RSK3 K100R (RSK3 K100R), pWZL/RSK3 K464R (RSK3 K464R) and pWZL control (Ctrl). Crystal violet assay for cell density 10 days after treatment with TGFβ (representative of 3 experiments). Ratio-paired t-test was used to determine statistical significance As RSK3 has two functional kinase domains, a carboxyl-terminal domain and an amino-terminal domain [ 33 ], we mutated each of these kinase domains [ 34 ,  35 ] and expressed the corresponding RSK3 mutants in HMECT cells (Fig.  1 B, G). In contrast to the expression of RSK3 or RSK3 C-terminal kinase domain mutant (K464R) that rescued TGFβ-induced senescence, the expression of the N-terminal kinase domain mutant (K100R) impaired this rescue (Fig.  1 H). Together, these results support that RSK3 prevents TGFβ-induced senescence through the activity of its N-terminal kinase domain. Endogenous RSK3 decreases after TGFβ treatment in a SMAD3-dependent manner   Interestingly, and according to transcriptomic data, RSK3 mRNA levels decreased upon TGFβ stimulation (Fig.  2 A), suggesting that endogenous RSK3 could be involved in TGFβ signaling. This decrease in mRNA was also observed at the protein level (Fig.  2 B). As canonical TGFβ signaling is mediated by the SMAD (Small Mothers Against Decapentaplegic) transcription factors [ 36 ], we tested the impact of constitutively expressing SMADs (Fig.  2 C, Supplemental Figure  2 A) on RSK3 levels. The constitutive expression of SMAD3, but not that of SMAD2 or SMAD4, reduced RSK3 mRNA and protein levels (Fig.  2 C-D, Supplemental Figure  2 A). This effect of SMAD3 on RSK3 expression may be direct as it binds to the  RSK3  gene and this binding is further increased by TGFβ treatment as detected in ChIP-seq data [ 37 ] (Fig.  2 E).   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   TGFβ represses RSK3 expression through SMAD3.  A  RSK3 expression decreased after TGFβ treatment. Transcriptome analyses ( n  = 3) were performed 48 h after cell treatment with TGFβ and RSK3 mRNA levels are shown. Statistical significance was determined with unpaired t-test.  B  Western blot validation of RSK3 protein decrease.  C ,  D  Cells were infected with pLPCX (Ctrl), or pLPCX/SMAD3 (SMAD3).  C  SMAD3 constitutive expression (left) and RSK3 gene expression (right). RT-QPCR was performed 72 h after infection ( n  = 3 independent experiments).  D  Western blot to assess RSK3 decrease induced by SMAD3 constitutive expression 3 days after infection (representative of 2 experiments).  E  ChIP-seq data analysis of SMAD3 binding in HMEC treated by TGFβ (TGFβ) or not (Ctrl) were visualized in UCSC genome browser after BigWig files uploading ( GSM2807302  for non-treated cells and  GSM2807304  for TGFβ-treated cells).  F - G  HMECT were infected with pWZL or pWZL/RSK3 and selected for 1 week with neomycin and next were infected with pLPCX or pLPCX/SMAD3.  F  Crystal violet assay for cell density 10 days after overexpression of SMAD3 (representative of 2 experiments).  G  Levels of mRNA encoding SASP factors. RT-QPCR was performed 3 days after infection with SMAD3 ( n  = 3 independent experiments). Ratio-paired t-test was used to determine  p -value In addition, only the constitutive expression of SMAD3 induced proliferation arrest and strongly increased the expression of SASP factor IL6 (Fig.  2 F-G, Supplemental Figure  2 B-C). This premature senescence induced by SMAD3 was partly reverted by RSK3 overexpression as it largely prevented proliferation arrest (Fig.  2 F) and SASP induction (Fig.  2 G) by SMAD3. According to these results, RSK3 may be an actor of TGFβ signaling as its expression decreased during TGFβ treatment, in a SMAD3-dependent manner, and as its constitutive expression rescued cells from TGFβ- as well as SMAD3-induced premature cellular senescence. RSK3 reverts senescence by inhibiting NF-κB transcription factors   To decipher the mechanism(s) by which RSK3 reverts induced senescence in HMECT we performed common transcription factor analysis using TFacts software [ 38 ] on genes whose expression changed upon TGFβ stimulation and was reverted by RSK3, according to our transcriptomic analysis. Members of the NF-κB (nuclear factor-kappa B) family of transcription factors were ranked first as potential transcriptional regulators of genes upregulated by TGFβ treatment when compared to non-treated cells, and downregulated in TGFβ-treated cells expressing RSK3 when compared to control TGFβ-treated cells (Fig.  3 A and Supplemental Table  4 ). The NF-κB family of transcription factors is well known for promoting cellular senescence and the expression of the SASP [ 39 – 42 ]. In addition to the increased expression in some NF-κB-dependent SASP factors upon TGFβ stimulation and its reversion by RSK3 (Fig.  1 E, Supplemental Figure  3 ), we detected a global positive regulation NF-κB signaling and its reversal by RSK3 using GSEA (Fig.  3 B). To investigate whether NF-κB inhibition mimicked effects observed with RSK3, we constitutively expressed a stabilized form of IκBα (nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cell inhibitor, alpha) (Fig.  3 C), a protein that sequesters NF-κB in the cytoplasm [ 43 ]. Strikingly, inhibition of NF-κB by IκBα expression partly reverted not only SASP expression but also TGFβ-induced proliferation arrest (Fig.