>Methods   Participants   All participants underwent comprehensive ophthalmic examinations at the Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital. According to the diabetic retinopathy disease severity scale and international diabetic retinopathy severity scale, patients with T2DM were classified into non-DR, NPDR, or PDR [ 5 ]. The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) senile cataract patients without DM scheduled for phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation; (2) senile cataract patients with T2DM scheduled for phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation; (3) T2DM patients with DR scheduled for anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) intravitreal injection. Exclusion criteria included the coexistence of other main ocular diseases, history of ophthalmic intervention procedures (e.g., laser photocoagulation, anti-VEGF intravitreal injection, vitrectomy, cataract extraction), autoimmune diseases, malignant tumors, severe liver disease, or pregnancy. In the discovery cohort, 18 patients with T2DM including 6 without DR (non-DR group), 6 with NPDR (NPDR group), and 6 with PDR (PDR group); and 6 senile cataract patients without T2DM (non-DM group) were recruited for DIA analysis. In the validation cohort, 10 patients were enrolled in each of the four groups, and the key proteins selected from the DIA analysis were validated using the PRM approach. In addition, 10 AH samples from the PDR group after intravitreal anti-VEGF treatment (Conbercept, Kanghong Biotechnologies, Chengdu, China; PV group) were also collected during the pars plana vitrectomy surgery. Each AH sample (100–200 µL) was harvested from the anterior chamber during microscope-assisted surgery using a sterile 1 mL insulin injection syringe and needle, and immediately kept in storage at − 80 °C for subsequent analysis.   The clinical data, including age, gender, diabetes duration, body mass index (BMI), blood pressure, laboratory tests for hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), serum total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), lipoprotein a, apolipoprotein (APO) A1, APOB100, serum creatinine, estimated glomerular filtrate rate (eGFR), international normalized ratio (INR), prothrombin activity (PT-A), prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), fibrinogen (FIB), and thrombin time (TT) within one week of ophthalmic examinations were recorded. Demographic and clinical characteristics of the enrolled patients are summarized in Tables S1 and S2. Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Fisher’s exact test and the Kruskal–Wallis H test were used to compare differences in clinical data using the R package TableOne (version 0.13.2) [ 16 ]. A  p -value of < 0.05 was considered significant. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) library generation and mass spectrometry (MS) assay for DDA and DIA   AH samples were treated on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Qsonica, Newtown, USA). Then samples from the discovery cohort were quantitatively examined using an MS assay for DIA. The most abundant proteins in the AH pools were separated on a Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal System Column (Agilent Technologies, California, USA). High- and low-abundance proteins were collected, desalted, and concentrated using a 5 kDa ultrafiltration tube (Sartorius, Gottingen, Germany). SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) was added, boiled for 15 min, and centrifuged at 14,000  g  at 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant was quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA).   Proteins were digested using a filter-aided sample preparation technique. Briefly, 200 µg protein extracts were put into an ultrafiltration tube. Low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) via repeated ultrafiltration. Then 100 µL of 11 mM iodoacetamide (I6125, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed thrice with UA buffer and then with 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3  buffer (A6141, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA) twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, USA) at 1:50 trypsin-to‐protein mass ratio overnight at 37 °C and 1:100 trypsin‐to‐protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. The resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate, desalted on C18 cartridges (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), concentrated using vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 40 µL 0.1% formic acid (F0507, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, USA).   For DDA-MS analysis, all fraction samples were analyzed by TlMSTOF mass spectrometer (Bruker, Massachusetts, USA) connected to Evosep One system liquid chromatography (Evosep, Odense, Denmark). The MS was operated in a DDA mode for the ion mobility-enhanced spectral library generation. We set the accumulation and ramp time 100 ms each and recorded mass spectra in the range from  m/z  100–1700 in positive electrospray mode, dynamic exclusion of 24.0s. lon source Voltage was set at 1500 V, temperature at 180℃, and dry gas at 3 L/min. The ion mobility was scanned from 0.75 to 1.35 Vs/cm 2 , then 8 cycles were performed with a 1.17 s duty cycle time using Parallel Accumulation-SErial Fragmentation (PASEF) MS/MS.   For DIA-MS analysis, the digested individual AH protein samples were analyzed by the same mass spectrometer and liquid chromatography as used in the DDA-MS analysis in the DIA mode. The mass spectrometer collected ion mobility MS spectra over a mass range of  m/z  100–1700. We defined up to 4 windows for single 100 ms TlMS scans according to the m/z-ion mobility plane. During PASEF MS/MS scanning, the collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.85 Vs/cm 2  to 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.30 Vs/cm 2 . MS data analysis   For DDA library data, the FASTA sequence database was searched using the Spectronaut ™  (version 14.4.200727.47784,  http://www.biognosys.com/ ) against the Uniprot human database (Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20 230 103,” containing 20389 protein sequences), with trypsin specificity allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as dynamic modifications. A decoy database was introduced to calculate the FDR resulting from random matches. All reported data were based on 99% confidence for protein identification as determined by false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%.   The DIA data in the spectral library were analyzed using the Spectronaut ™  (version 14.4.200727.47784). The main software parameters were as follows: retention time prediction type, dynamic iRT; interference with MS2 level correction, enabled; and cross-run normalization, enabled. The proteins in each sample were identified using peptide spectrum matching. All peptide and protein results were filtered based on a Q-value cutoff of 0.01 (equivalent to FDR < 1%). Protein identification based on DIA mode   Proteins with quantitative data from more than 50% of the samples in each group were selected for further analysis. The cellular localization of each protein was evaluated using the DeepTMHMM server ( https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/DeepTMHMM-1.0/ ), a tool that predicts the transmembrane helices and the cellular localization of proteins based on their amino acid sequences. The predictions were further validated to ensure consistency with known protein localization data. To identify proteins associated with extracellular vesicles (EVs), the identified proteins were cross-referenced with the Vesiclepedia database, which is a comprehensive resource of proteins associated with EVs. The comparison was performed using the FunRich tool ( https://funrich.org/ ) [ 17 ], which integrates various functional enrichment analyses. A Venn plot was used to show the overlapping proteins among the four groups. Three-dimensional principal component analysis (PCA) was performed and plotted using the R packages ropls (version 1.14.1) and scatterplot3d (version 0.3–41). Proteins with a fold change above 1.5 and a  p -value less than 0.05 (Student’s t-test) were considered differential proteins between the two groups. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS (version 24.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)   GSEA was performed using the GSEA software v3.1.0 ( www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp ) against the canonical pathways downloaded from the MSigDB database ( https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/human/genesets.jsp?collection=CP ) [ 18 ]. Gene sets with  p -value less than 0.05 were considered significantly enriched. The visual representation of GSEA was generated using the R package GseaVis (version 0.1.0;  https://github.com/junjunlab/GseaVis ). Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and determination of the candidate proteins for PRM validation   The R package WGCNA (Version 1.68) was employed to cluster proteins with similar expression profiles and explore their association with clinical traits. The co-expression network was constructed through the following steps: (1) A hierarchical clustering analysis based on protein expression data was performed to exclude outliers. (2) A β value was selected as the weighting coefficient to build the adjacency matrix and a subsequent scale-free network. Next, the samples were clustered using the hierarchical clustering method and co-expressed modules were constructed using a dynamic tree-cutting algorithm. Core modules were screened based on an absolute correlation coefficient greater than 0.5 and a  p -value less than 0.01. Modules with stronger correlations to clinical traits were further prioritized for downstream analysis.   Candidate proteins for PRM validation were identified through a two-step process: (1) Pearson correlation coefficients between module eigengenes and clinical traits were measured and modules significantly related to clinical traits ( p  < 0.05) were subjected to Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis using the R package ClusterProfiler (version 4.10.1); (2) Pearson correlation coefficients (gene significance, GS) between protein expression levels and clinical traits, and module membership (MM) between protein expression levels and module eigengenes were calculated [ 19 ]. Candidate proteins in the modules positively correlated with clinical traits were filtered using GS values > 0.5 and MM values > 0.7, while those in negatively correlated modules were filtered with GS values < − 0.5 and MM values > 0.7. PRM validation   AH samples from the validation cohort were quantitatively examined by LC-PRMMS analysis [ 20 ] to verify the expression levels of candidate proteins obtained by the DIA approach. Peptides were prepared following the DIA protocol and tryptic peptides were loaded onto C18 stage tips (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, and 250 mm length) for desalting before reversed-phase chromatography on an Easy nLC-1200 system (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). One hour liquid chromatography gradients with acetonitrile concentrations ranging from 5 to 30% in 45 min were used. PRM analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with the following parameters: a full MS1 scan acquired with a resolution of 60,000 (at 300 m/z), AGC target 3.0 × 10 − 6 , and maximum ion injection time 200 ms. This was followed by 20 PRM scans at 30,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), AGC 3.0 × 10 − 6 , and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Data were searched against Uniprot human database (Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20 230 103.fasta) and analyzed using the Skyline protocol (MacCoss Lab, University of Washington) [ 21 ].    Proteins with a fold change above 1.5 and a  p -value less than 0.05 in PRM were identified as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). WikiPathways enrichment analysis for DEPs was performed using the R package ClusterProfiler (version 4.10.1). Pathways with a  p -value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed to examine the interrelations of the identified DEPs. The network was built using STRING DB (version 11) and visualized with Cytoscape (version 3.6.1). The interaction degree of each DEP was calculated to assess its significance within the network. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was employed to evaluate the potential of DEPs to differentiate between various stages of DR using R Software 4.1.3. The area under curve (AUC) with a 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated, and DEPs with AUC values of 0.7 or higher were considered hub proteins. Pearson correlation analysis was performed to assess the relationship between hub proteins and clinical data (including age, DM duration, BMI, and laboratory test indicators). In addition, a paired sample t-test was conducted using SPSS version 24.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) to compare changes in DEPs between PDR and PV groups following anti-VEGF treatment. ConnectivityMap (CMap)-based drug prediction   The CMap database ( https://clue.io/ ) was employed to identify compounds that produce signatures opposite to those induced by NPDR vs. non-DM and PDR vs. non-DM [ 22 ]. Upregulated proteins between NPDR and non-DM, as well as between PDR and non-DM were used for analysis. The parameters used included gene expression (L1000), the touchstone reference dataset, individual query, and version 1.0. A list of compounds was generated, ordered by their similarity to the input signature, with scores ranging from −100 to 100. A negative score indicated an opposing effect between the compound and the input signature. The top fifteen compounds with a score < −99 and known mechanism of action were retained for further analysis. Results   AH spectral library generation and protein identification by DIA   In this study, the library was constructed by DDA-MS analysis, including all spectrums of non-DM, non-DR, NPDR, and PDR groups (Fig.  1 A). A total of 5800 peptides and 795 proteins were obtained by DIA-MS analysis. From these, 739 proteins having quantitative data in over 50% of samples from each group were used for further analysis (Fig.  1 B-C, Table  S3 ). Of these 739 proteins, 456 (62%) were extracellular, 156 (21%) intracellular, and 127 (17%) transmembrane proteins (Fig.  S1 ). Additionally, among the 283 intracellular and transmembrane proteins, 237 (84%) were classified as vesicle proteins (Table  S3 ). The non-DM, non-DR, NPDR, and PDR groups contained 665, 635, 664, and 651 proteins, respectively, with 560 proteins common to all groups (Fig.  1 D). Three-dimensional PCA analysis of AH protein expression profiles demonstrated clear separation among the four clinical stages, indicating overall heterogeneity (Fig.  1 E).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Workflow of the study and protein identification in aqueous humor using DIA mode. ( A ) Overview of the study workflow. ( B ) Number of unique peptides examined in each sample. ( C ) Number of proteins identified in each sample. ( D ) Venn diagram showing unique proteins in aqueous humor from non-DM, non-DR, NPDR, and PDR groups. ( E ) PCA plots of non-DM, non-DR, NPDR, and PDR groups based on DIA analysis in the discovery cohort. DIA: data-independent acquisition; DM: diabetes mellitus; DR: diabetic retinopathy; NPDR: non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy; PDR: proliferative diabetic retinopathy; PCA: principal component analysis Differential proteomic analysis among the four groups identified 244 differential proteins (82 upregulated, 162 downregulated) in DR vs. non-DR, 104 (42 upregulated, 62 downregulated) in NPDR vs. non-DR, 124 (35 upregulated, 89 downregulated) in PDR vs. NPDR, and 23 (7 upregulated, 16 downregulated) in non-DR vs. non-DM (Fig.  S2 ). Protein enrichment analysis   Next, we performed GSEA to investigate the molecular mechanisms at various stages of DR. Compared to the non-DR group, the upregulated differential proteins in the DR group exhibited significant enrichment in folate metabolism, selenium micronutrient network, complement and coagulation cascades, and transport of small molecules pathways, while the downregulated differential proteins were enriched in the metabolism of carbohydrates and lysosome pathways. Similar protein-enriched pathways were noted in the PDR vs. NPDR comparison. However, in the NPDR vs. non-DR comparison, upregulated pathways included binding and uptake of ligands by scavenger receptors instead of the transport of small molecules, while downregulated pathways involved Rho Gtpase effectors and membrane trafficking. Moreover, compared to the non-DR group, the differential proteins of AH, were enriched in signaling by Wnt, Rho Gtpase effectors and cell cycle pathways, which showed a markedly decreasing trend in the non-DM group (Fig.  2 ).   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Key enriched pathways in DR vs. non-DR ( A ), NPDR vs. non-DR ( B ), PDR vs. NPDR ( C ) and non-DR vs. non-DM ( D ) using GSEA. DM: diabetes mellitus; DR: diabetic retinopathy; NPDR: non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy; PDR: proliferative diabetic retinopathy; GSEA: gene set enrichment analysis Protein co-expression modules   WGCNA analysis was conducted to identify the core modules and key proteins whose expression was closely associated with the clinical traits. Five protein co-expression modules were identified: turquoise (237 proteins), blue (202 proteins), brown (65 proteins), grey (74 proteins), and yellow (43 proteins). The turquoise, brown, and blue modules were core modules (Table  S4 , Fig.  S3 ). The turquoise module correlated positively with PDR (cor = 0.72,  p  = 8e-05), with proteins enriched in complement and coagulation cascades, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and cholesterol metabolism (Fig.  3 A-D). The blue (cor = − 0.78,  p  = 8e-06) with proteins enriched in the lysosome and cell adhesion molecule and brown modules (cor = − 0.66,  p  = 4e-04) with proteins enriched in estrogen signaling pathways and pathways of neurodegeneration-multiple diseases correlated negatively with PDR. Candidate proteins identified based on GS and MM values were 76, 100, and 31 for the turquoise, blue, and brown modules, respectively (Fig.  3 E-G).   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Identification of clinically significant protein modules by weighted correlation network analysis. ( A ) Module-trait correlation plot based on module eigengenes, where red and blue represent positive and negative correlations, respectively. Values in each grid represent the correlation coefficient and corresponding  p -value in parentheses between modules and clinical traits. ( B – D ) KEGG analysis of the turquoise ( B ), blue ( C ), and brown ( D ) modules. ( E ) Venn diagram showing proteins with GS (PDR) > 0.5 and MM > 0.7 in the turquoise module. ( F ,  G ) Venn diagram showing proteins with GS (PDR) < − 0.5 and MM > 0.7 in the ( F ) blue and ( G ) brown modules. WGCNA: weighted correlation network analysis; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; GS: gene significance; MM: module membership Analysis of DEP characteristics by PRM validation   Based on their potential biological relevance to DR and combined with fold change analysis, 96 proteins were further selected from the candidate proteins identified by WGCNA for PRM validation in an independent cohort. PRM analysis confirmed 83 proteins (51 in turquoise, 30 in blue, and 2 in brown) in the validation cohort (Table  S5 ). Seven DEPs were detected in the NPDR vs. non-DR groups, with five (F2, KLKB1, FGG, APCS, and FGB) having AUC values above 0.7 (Table  1 , Table  S6 , Fig.  4 A, Fig.  S4 A). KEGG analysis indicated these DEPs were enriched in complement and coagulation cascades, folate metabolism, selenium micronutrient network, VEGFA VEGFR2 signaling, and vitamin B12 metabolism. PPI analysis revealed interactions among the five hub proteins (Fig. 4B,C, Table  S7 ).   Table 1.   The hub proteins (ranked by AUC) in NPDR vs. non-DR and PDR vs. NPDR       Protein   Gene name   Protein location   module   Ratio     P  value   AUC value       NPDR vs. non-DR     P00734   F2   extracellular   turquoise   1.54009   0.036444   0.89       P03952   KLKB1   extracellular   turquoise   2.155632   0.010474   0.86       P02679   FGG   extracellular   turquoise   12.65522   0.033686   0.79       P02743   APCS   extracellular   turquoise   3.336828   0.035931   0.78       P02675   FGB   extracellular   turquoise   8.553475   0.044983   0.77     PDR vs. NPDR