>Materials and methods   Experimental design: in vivo necrotic enteritis model   In the current study, the NE model previously described by Gholamiandehkordi et al. (2007) was used, with some modifications 66 . Briefly, one-day-old non-vaccinated Ross 308 broiler chicks were purchased from a local hatchery and randomly allocated into challenged (NE) and non-challenged (Ctrl) groups with 80 and 20 animals in each, respectively. All birds were provided with  ad libitum  access to feed and water. Until day 17 of the experiment, all birds received a wheat/rye-based (43%/7.5%) diet with soybean meal as protein source (30%). Afterwards, the source of protein in the diet was replaced with fishmeal (30%) in challenged group. This type of diet composition predisposes broilers to the development of NE. It contains high level of poorly digestible proteins and non–starch polysaccharides that lead to digestibility losses. On days 14 and 16 birds, from the NE group where orally treated with 10-fold dose of live attenuated  Eimeria  vaccine Paracox-5 (containing  E. acervulina  HP,  E. maxima  CP,  E. maxima  MFP,  E. mitis  HP,  E. tenella  HP) (MSD Animal Health, Brussels, Belgium). The  netB  positive  Clostridium perfringens  type G strain CP56 was cultured in BHI broth (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, US) overnight at 37 °C under anaerobic conditions. Consecutively, broilers from the treatment group received an oral dose of approximately 5 × 10 8  CFU of pathogenic  C. perfringens  strain CP56 on days 18 and 19. All animals were euthanized on day 20 of the experiment by injecting intravenously an overdose of barbiturate (sodium pentobarbital 20% (KELA Laboratoria nv, Hoogstraten, Belgium)). Prior to euthanasia, 3 ml blood was withdrawn from a jugular vein and collected into EDTA-treated vacutainers for further separation of plasma (1900 rcf during 10 min at room temperature, with no brake in the swinging bucket centrifuge). The precision of biomarker identification in proteomics research is conditioned by the quality of the samples 67 . Consequently, blood collection procedures were meticulously executed to minimize any potential variations in handling, ensuring a robust foundation for accurate analyses and meaningful insights in the pursuit of biomarker discovery. Vacutainers with blood were inverted five times prior to centrifugation; after, a portion of plasma was carefully pipetted into a new tube, preventing contact between the pipette tip and ‘buffy coat’-part of the extract thus collection of the bottom 2–5 mm layer of plasma was omitted. Each sample of plasma was aliquoted, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at – 80 °C for further analysis. Applied standard operation procedure (SOP) for blood collection is described in detail in the Supplementary Note.   For evaluating severity of NE lesions, the macroscopic scoring of small mid-intestinal segments (duodenum, jejunum, ileum) of all birds was performed according to scoring system established by Keyburn et al. (2006) 68 . Each animal was given an NE lesion score which was calculated as the average of the scores estimated for evaluated middle parts of intestinal segments. Birds with a lesion score of 2 and higher were classified as NE-positive. Statistical analysis of performance parameters and macroscopic scoring was performed using GraphPad Prism (version 8.4.3, San Diego, USA).   All the experiments and manipulations involving animals were approved by the ethical committee of the Faculties of Veterinary Medicine and Bioscience Engineering of Ghent University (EC2020-045). All experiments were performed in accordance with the guidelines and regulations of the Ethical Committee; this study complied with ARRIVE guidelines 69 . Proteomics sample preparation   The proteomics analysis was performed on plasma samples obtained from birds with the most severe NE lesion score (score 5–6,  n  = 17) and birds that received no treatment (score 0,  n  = 9). Sample sizes were determined using G*Power software (ver. 3.1.9.2, Kiel, Germany) with applied parameters of α = 0.05 and power = 95%. Of each sample 1 µL plasma was added to 50 µL S-trap buffer containing 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.55. Proteins were reduced by addition of 15 mM dithiothreitol and incubation for 30 min at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 min at room temperature (later RT) in the dark. Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% and subsequently samples were diluted 7-fold with binding buffer containing 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1. The samples were loaded on the 96-well S-Trap™ plate (Protifi), placed on top of a deepwell plate, and centrifuged for 2 min at 1,500 x g at RT. After protein binding, the S-trap™ plate was washed three times by adding 200 µL binding buffer and centrifugation for 2 min at 1,500 x g at RT. A new deepwell receiver plate was placed below the 96-well S-Trap™ plate and 50 mM TEAB containing trypsin (1/100, w/w) was added for digestion overnight at 37 °C. By centrifugation for 2 min at 1,500 x g, peptides were eluted in three times, first with 80 µL 50 mM TEAB, then with 80 µL 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and finally with 80 µL 0.2% FA in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (50/50, v/v). Eluted peptides were dried completely by vacuum centrifugation and stored at − 20 °C until further use. For the analysis of technical replicates, randomly selected blood plasma samples ( n  = 3) corresponding to Ctrl group were divided into three independent samples each and measured individually. Sample preparation and the following steps were carried out separately. LC-MS/MS analysis   For nano-DDA analysis, purified peptides of all 26 samples were re-dissolved in 20 µL loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v) and the peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs) 70 . From each sample, 2 µg was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 µL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on a 250 mm nanoEase column (M/Z HSS T3 column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm I.D., Waters) kept at a constant of 45 °C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 5 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 145 min, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with 95% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 (minimum AGC of 1,000) were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. The C-trap was filled at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms and the MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer with a fixed first mass of 145 m/z. Only peptides with charge states ranging from + 2 to + 6 were included for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project 71 .   For Evo-DIA analysis, from each of the 26 samples redissolved in loading solvent A as described above, the peptide concentration was adjusted to 0.015 µg/µL with 0.1% FA. iRT peptides (Biognosys, P/N Ki-3002-1) were added to each sample according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then, 300 ng of each sample was loaded on an Evotip (Evosep, P/N EV2003) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All loaded Evotips were stored in 0.1% FA at 4 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis could be started. Samples were run in data-independent mode on an Evosep One LC-system (Evosep, Denmark) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed with the 15 SPD method (88 min run length) using the endurance Evosep column (15 cm x 150 μm I.D., 1.9 μm beads, Evosep, Denmark). For elution of the peptides from the column solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in LC-MS-grade water and solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in ACN. Full-scan MS spectra ranging from 375 to 1500  m / z  with an AGC target value of 5E6, a maximum fill time of 50 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z were followed by 30 quadrupole isolations with a precursor isolation width of 10  m / z  for HCD fragmentation at an NCE of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 3E6 for maximum injection time of 45 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200  m / z  in the Orbitrap analyser without multiplexing. The isolation intervals ranging from 400 to 900  m / z  were created with the Skyline software tool. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project 71 . Proteomics data analysis   Raw files corresponding to the 26 nano-DDA runs were searched together using the MaxQuant software 72  (version 2.0.3.0) with mainly default search settings, including a false discovery rate (FDR) set at 1% on peptide and protein level. Recorded spectra were searched against the  Gallus gallus  proteins present in the UniProt database (reference proteome UP000000539 containing 18,112 sequences, downloaded from  www.uniprot.org , release from June 2022). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification.   Raw files corresponding to the 26 Evo-DIA runs were searched together using the DIA-NN software 33  (version 1.8.1). Mainly default settings were enabled, in combination with a library-free search with selected FASTA digest using the same protein database as described for nano-DDA. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme (allowing cleavage N-terminally at proline and allowing up to two missed cleavages), and carbamidomethylation of cysteines, oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of N-termini were set as variable modifications, with maximum number of variable modifications set to five. The maximum number of trypsin-missed cleavages was set to two. Precursor mass range filter was set at 400–900 m/z, the match between runs (MBR) option which was enabled, and “mass accuracy“ (MS2 mass accuracy) was set at 20 ppm and “MS1 accuracy“ (MS1 mass accuracy) at 10 ppm.   Further statistical analysis was performed using the RStudio software 73  (version 4.1.1). Peptide expression matrices were prepared as follows: for nano-DDA, the MaxQuant peptides output table was used after removal of reverse database hits; for Evo-DIA, the DIA-NN main report output table was filtered at a precursor and protein library q-value cut-off of 1% and only proteins with at least one proteotypic peptide were retained. Protein expression matrices were prepared as follows: for nano-DDA, the MaxQuant proteinGroups output table was used after removal of reverse database hits and hits only identified by site; for Evo-DIA, the DIA-NN main report output table was filtered at a precursor and protein library q-value cut-off of 1% and only proteins with at least one proteotypic peptide were retained. Reported peptide and protein ID rates took into account features detected in at least two samples. For differential abundance analysis, MaxLFQ-normalized protein intensities were log 2  transformed and proteins with less than four valid values in at least one experimental condition were removed, leading to a list of 295 and of 344 quantified proteins in the experiment for nano-DDA and Evo-DIA, respectively. Missing values were imputed by random sampling from a normal distribution centered around the noise level (package DEP) 74 . Pairwise comparison testing between necrotic enteritis (NE) and control (Ctrl) groups was then carried out using the limma package 39 , with statistical significance for differential regulation set at an FDR cut-off value of 0.05 and a |log 2 (fold change)| above 1. Functional gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)   Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to identify gene ontology (GO) terms associated with proteomic changes upon NE was performed using software GSEA (version 4.2.3) 75 . Gene names corresponding to quantified proteins were ranked based on  t -test metric and used as input data. A significance threshold cut-off of FDR  q -value ≤ 0.05 was applied for both positive and negative enrichment hits. Queries for nano-DDA and Evo-DIA were performed separately, with a total of 248 proteins out of the 295 quantified getting annotated (and thus included in the analysis) for nano-DDA and 272 out of the 344 quantified getting annotated for Evo-DIA. Protein detection by enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)   To evaluate the analytical performance of MS in comparison to immunoassays and to examine the potential candidate biomarkers for chicken gut health in plasma samples from infected and non-infected birds, three commercially available ELISA kits were performed. The immunoassay kits for serum amyloid protein (HPS5), complement factor D (CFD) and Mannan Associated Serine Protease 2 (MASP2) were obtained from Abbexa LTD (abx257741,Abbexa LTD, Cambridge, UK) and MyBioSource (CFD, MBS2503729; MASP2, MBS2506173, MyBioSource, San Diego, CA, USA), respectively. The assays were executed according to the instructions of manufacturers, applying dilution factor of 1:1000 for HPS5, 1:7 for CFD, and 1:2 for MASP2, testing each individual sample in duplicate. Statistical analysis of immunoassay results was performed in GraphPad Prism (version 8.4.3, San Diego, USA) software using non-parametric testing considering the size and type of distribution of each group. Differences between NE and Ctrl groups were assessed by Mann-Whitney test; correlation between tested proteins was assessed by a Spearman rank test. Correlation coefficients between the two MS-methods and immunoassays were analyzed by Spearman rank test. Protein detection by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)   The target peptides for PRM were selected from identified precursor lists of the above acquired data with nanoLC-DDA and Evo-DIA methods. More in particular three peptides per target protein biomarker CFD, HPS5, and MASP2 were manually selected using Skyline-daily software 76  (ver. 24.1.1.398) based on proteotypicity towards the chicken database present in the UniProt database (reference proteome UP000000539 containing 18,112 sequences, downloaded from  www.uniprot.org , release from June 2022), signal intensity, absence of missed cleavages and modifications. Several additional target peptides of APOAB (as a non-regulated housekeeping protein) were included in the analysis for the downstream normalization across samples. Heavy isotopically labeled target peptides were purchased from JPT Peptide Technologies GmbH (Berlin, Germany). Target peptides developed for PRM assay are reported in Supplementary Table  S5 .   PRM acquisition method development was performed in several steps. First, 100 fmol of a pool of synthetic target peptides was loaded onto the LC-column in unscheduled PRM mode to determine the retention time intervals. A scheduled PRM method with 4 min time intervals was created through Skyline-daily (ver. 24.1.1.398) and evaluated on the same pool of synthetic peptides. Next, a pooled plasma sample obtained from 27 experimental animals was spiked in with 100 fmol, 10 fmol, 1 fmol peptide amounts to evaluate the scheduled PRM method next to estimate the spike-I amount of each peptide. Through Skyline, the windows were manually adjusted where needed and the optimal spike-in amount for each peptide was determined. The adjusted scheduled PRM schema was used in the final plasma sample PRM runs spiked in with the optimal peptide amount.   For the actual PRM runs, plasma samples were prepared for proteome analysis as described above and the resulting peptides were redissolved in 20 µl of loading buffer A (0.05/95.5 ACN/H2O 0.1% TFA). A total of 11 µl of the samples was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 Pro Flow nanoLC system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Trapping was performed at 20 µl/min for 2 min in loading solvent A on a 5 mm trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 300 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads). The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Aurora Ultimate, 1.7 μm C18, 75 μm inner diameter (IonOpticks) kept at a constant temperature of 45 °C in a butterfly oven (Phoenix S&T). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 0.5% MS solvent B reaching 10% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) in 38 min, 26.4% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) in 67 min, 44% in 68 min and 56% MS solvent B in 70 min followed by a 5-minute wash at 56% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) at a constant flowrate of 250 nl/min.   The mass spectrometer was operated in PRM mode, automatically switching between MS and PRM acquisition. Full-scan MS spectra (150–1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3E6 and 40ms maximum ion time. The PRM method included HCD fragmentation of the ions of interest listed in Table  1  with a 1.5 m/z isolation window with a loop count of 1. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 30,000 resolution with maximum injection time of 100ms and an AGC target of 5E5 ions.   Following manual evaluation of the recorded transitions in Skyline, the ratio of light to heavy peptide peak areas was determined for each target peptide using the peak areas of their shared transitions, calculated as (ΣLight)/(ΣHeavy). These ratios were then multiplied by the heavy peptide amount in fmol per injection, yielding the abundance of the light peptide in fmol per injection.   Peptide intensities were normalized based on APOB protein peptides FALSGIVTPGAK, FLGGSHDNSISLTK, IQIQNIDIR, a protein with very low abundance differences between experimental groups. The reference sample for the normalization was chosen as the one that for all three peptides had an estimated amount in fmol closer to the median fmol amount across samples. Normalization factors per sample were calculated for each peptide independently as the ratio of peptide amounts of each sample relative to the reference sample. A consensus normalization factor per sample was then calculated as the mean of the normalization factors of the three peptides. These values were used to get the final peptide amounts, by dividing the original values by the corresponding sample normalization factor. Significant changes in peptide abundances between NE and Ctrl groups were assessed by Mann-Whitney test. Target peptide ratios detected with PRM assay are reported in Supplementary Table  S6 . Conclusion   In the present study, we used a broiler gut inflammation model of NE to identify potential blood plasma biomarkers for intestinal health of chicken by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. The primary objective was to demonstrate the performance of available DDA- and DIA-based methods, using standard settings. Rather than directly comparing these strategies, we aimed to leverage their unique strengths. While the nano-DDA approach resulted in higher initial numbers of identified proteins, the Evo-DIA workflow showed superior completeness and quantification of the acquired data. Nonetheless, both approaches quantified proteins with a similar precision and we affirm that both methods, with inherent advantages and limitations, serve the purpose for comparative studies between healthy and diseased samples, as well as for the biomarker discovery purposes. Furthermore, the identified potential biomarkers highlight the utility and effectiveness of presented approach, leveraging the agreement in performance between proteomics methods. This methodological innovation offers new insights into the molecular mechanisms of NE in poultry and fills a critical void in avian proteomics. The gut barrier failure in broilers may be diagnosed and evaluated using the prospective biomarkers that have been identified, as a basis for field validation by quick and easy diagnostic instruments. Electronic supplementary material   Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.     Supplementary Material 1  (101.7KB, pdf)      Supplementary Material 2  (279.2KB, pdf)      Supplementary Material 3  (118.2KB, pdf)      Supplementary Material 4  (129.9KB, xlsx)      Supplementary Material 5  (86.5KB, xlsx)      Supplementary Material 6  (12.1KB, xlsx)      Supplementary Material 7  (14KB, xlsx)      Supplementary Material 8  (10.7KB, xlsx)      Supplementary Material 9  (30.6KB, xlsx)    Acknowledgements   The authors heartily thank all co-workers of the Livestock Gut Health Team (LiGHT) Ghent for their excellent assistance in the conduct of the necrotic enteritis in vivo trial and during sampling. Especial gratitude goes out to colleagues from VIB Proteomics Core and their great help in the laboratory and data processing. Furthermore, we sincerely thank Flemish Agency for Innovation and Entrepreneurship and Impextraco NV for funding this research study. Abbreviations     ACN   Acetonitrile   AGP   Antimicrobial growth promoters   BHI   Brain heart infusion   CFU   Colony forming unit   CV   Coefficient of variation   DDA   Data dependent acquisition   DIA   Data independent acquisition   DTT   Dithiothreitol   ELISA   Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay   FA   Formic acid   FC   Fold change   FDR   False discovery rate   GO   Gene ontology   GSEA   Gene set enrichment analysis   HCD   High collision dissociation   NE   Necrotic enteritis   NES   Normalized enrichment score   LC   Liquid chromatography   LFQ   Label free quantification   MS   Mass spectrometer/spectrometry   PRM   Parallel reaction monitoring   RT   Room temperature   SDS   Sodium dodecyl sulfate   TEAB   Triethylammonium bicarbonate   TFA   Trifluoroacetic acid   Author contributions   S.T., E.G. and G.A. performed the in vivo experiment, macroscopic lesion scoring of the birds, sample collection and analysis of in vivo data; S.T. and T.M.M. interpreted the MS-based proteomic analyses, executed bioinformatics analyses, wrote the manuscript, generated figures for the manuscript; T.M. submitted generated data to the public repository; D.V.H. assisted in sample preparation; D.V.H., A.S. and F.I. performed the LC–MS/MS analysis; A.S. assisted with PRM method development and downstream data analysis; F.I., S.D., and G.A. supervised and guided the project, designed the experiments, wrote and reviewed the manuscript; F.I., G.A., T. M. M., F.V.I. and T.R. reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the submitted version of the manuscript. Funding   This study was supported by a Flanders Innovation & Entrepreneurship, a regional governmental agency. S.T. is funded by a grant from the Flemish Agency for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (Baekeland Mandate HBC.2020.2274) and Impextraco NV. F.I. acknowledges support from Ghent University Concerted Research Action grant B