>Materials and Methods   Culture of hMSCs from Different Sources    hMSCs (hDPSCs and hAD-MSCs) and HDFa were obtained from 3 independent donors. HDFa were purchased from Gibco (NY, USA), and DPSCs from Lonza (Switzerland) as cryopreserved cells, while AD-MSCs isolated from subcutaneous aspirate were kindly provided by the Tissue Bank of Pavel Jozef Safarik University in Košice, Slovakia. Then, cells were cultured in a humidified incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO 2  in DMEM-F12 cultivation medium (Gibco, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Biosera, France), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Biosera, France). During preculture, after reaching 80–90% confluence, cells were harvested using TrypLE Express Enzyme (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and then seeded at 5 × 10 3  cells/cm 2 . Cell morphology was monitored during all experiments using the phase contrast microscope XDS-2 (Optika, Italy). All analyses were performed with passage 5. Cell Viability Assay    Cells of each type were seeded in 96-well plates (Corning, NY, USA) at 5 × 10 3  cells/cm 2  density in hexaplets. At days 2, 4, and 6 the cells were washed with Dulbecco’s PBS solution (DPBS, Gibco, NY, USA) and incubated with a mixture of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)−2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide solution (MTT, Duchefa Biochemie, Netherlands) and culture medium in ratio 1:10 for 5 h at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere. Then, 10% SDS solution (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) was applied to each well, and the plates were incubated overnight. Changes were measured spectrophotometrically at 570 nm using a microplate reader (BioTek, VT, USA). Stemness Evaluation of MSCs   In Vitro Multilineage Differentiation   Control and differentiated cells were grown in 6-well plates. On the 21st day after osteogenic (OsteoMAX-XF differentiation medium, Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) or adipogenic (StemPro adipogenesis differentiation kit, Gibco, NY, USA) medium application, cells were fixed by 4% paraformaldehyde (Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA) for 30 min at room temperature (RT). After DPBS washing, formed Ca 2+  deposits or lipid-rich vacuoles were stained with Alizarin Red S solution (Merck, Germany) for 3 min or with Oil Red O solution (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) for 30 min at RT, respectively. Next, the dye was aspirated, and cells were carefully washed 3 times with DPBS or ultrapure water to remove the remaining stain. Finally, cells were kept in ultrapure water. Staining intensity was monitored and micrographs were captured by the inverted microscope XDS-2 (Optika, Italy). Cell Surface Marker Analysis By Flow Cytometry   When cells reached 80% confluence, a single-cell suspension was prepared by passing the cells through a 70 μm strainer (Corning, NY, USA). After centrifugation (400 ×  g , 13 °C, 5 min), 1 × 10 5  cells were incubated in FACS buffer (1 mM EDTA and 5% mouse serum in DPBS) for 30 min at 4 °C in the dark. After incubation, 5 µL of a fluorescently labeled antibody (BioLegend, CA, USA) was added to 1 × 10 5  cells, followed by another incubation for 1 h at 4 °C in the dark. Then, the labeled samples were washed with DPBS buffer and centrifuged at 450 x  g , 13 °C, 4 min. Stained cell pellet was resuspended in FACS buffer. All samples were analyzed using the FACS Aria II cytometer (BD Biosciences, NJ, USA) on 10,000 events and BD FACSDiva software v8.0.1. Gating was set up based on an unstained/isotype control, and the gating of all samples was consistent. Pluripotent Proteins Detection   Abundances of pluripotent proteins were determined by Proteome Profiler Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Array (R&D system, MN, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. This array provides a targeted analysis of 15 proteins, established markers of pluripotency. Briefly, cultured MSCs were washed with DPBS and scraped off into lysis buffer 16 supplemented in the kit. Total protein concentration was detected using micro BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The same amount of total protein (270 µg) from different cell types was used for parallel incubation. Proteins were detected by chemiluminescence after application of the developing solution (ClarityMax, Bio-Rad, CA, USA) and visualized using ChemiDoc XRS + system (Bio-Rad, CA, USA) as described previously [ 20 ]. Densitometric analysis of protein abundances was accomplished via ImageLab software v6.0 (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Signal intensities (pixel densities) were normalized to the positive control. Proteomic Analysis   Protein Extraction and Digestion   Cells were harvested in biological triplicates on a day when cells reached 80‒90% confluence. Then, cells were washed with ice-cold DPBS and scraped off from flasks using SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.6, and 100 mM dithiothreitol) supplemented with protease (Roche, Switzerland) and phosphatase (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) inhibitors. Then, lysates were transferred to the tubes, incubated on ice for 15 min, and sonicated (3 × 5 s, 20% pulse), followed by 20 min centrifugation (14,000 ×  g ) at 13 °C. The final supernatant was aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C until use. Protein concentration was determined by Pierce 660 nm kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).   Protein digestion was performed on beads as described in the literature [ 21 ]. Aliquots of 60 µg of protein samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at RT and 600 rpm on thermoshaker TS-100 C (Biosan, Latvia) and quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol. Next, the mixture (1:1) of beads was prepared: Sera-Mag Carboxylate-Modified Beads (Cytiva, UK), hydrophilic solids 50 µg/µL, and hydrophobic solids 50 µg/µL. On the magnetic rack MagneSphere (Promega, WI, USA), the beads were pelleted for 1 min, and the supernatant was removed by pipette. Off the rack, the beads were reconstituted in bidistilled water and pipette-mixed. Following, 30 µL (60 µg) of the bead stock was added to the alkylated/quenched protein samples and pipette-mixed. For binding, 70 µL of 100% ethanol was added to the suspension to achieve 50% final ethanol concentration. The tubes were incubated in the thermoshaker for 10 min at RT and 1000 rpm. The beads were pelleted for 2 min, and the supernatant was discarded. Bond proteins were washed 5 times with 140 µL of 80% ethanol. Next, 10 µL of 0.1 µg/µL trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) and 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added. The samples were incubated in the thermoshaker for 18 h at 37 °C and 1000 rpm. Consequently, the beads were pelleted for 2 min, and the supernatant was recovered into a fresh 2 mL tube, followed by a second elution with 60 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptide concentration was measured with a microvolume spectrophotometer DS-11 FX+ (Denovix, DE, USA). Relative Label-Free Quantification By Liquid Chromatography Coupled Mass Spectrometry   Chromatographic separation was done on Vanquish Neo (Dionex Softron for Thermo Scientific, Germany) at 35 °C and flow rate 250 nL/min. Peptides were desalted on PepMap Neo trap C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5-µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Lithuania) at 50 µL/min and profiled on EASY-Spray PepMap Neo C18, 75 μm × 500 mm, 2-µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Lithuania) in 2-step gradient 2–24% in 100 min and 24–40% in 20 min of mobile phase (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) in data-dependent mode with 2 s cycle at top speed and 2 kV on capillary with internal mass calibration at run start. Parent scan 350–1,700 m/z was done at 120,000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target 200% and a maximum injection time 50 ms. The precursor intensity threshold was set to 5 × 10 4  with 60 s exclusion and 30% high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Fragments were acquired at a resolution 30,000, an AGC target 300%, and a maximum injection time 200 ms.   The generated dataset was processed in MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 [ 22 ] with Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylation C was set as a permanent modification, and oxidation M plus deamidation N/Q were selected as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance in the first search was 10 ppm, and in the main search after recalibration was 2 ppm, while the fragment tolerance was 10 ppm. Based on the reverse decoy database search, the false discovery rate for peptides and proteins was 1%. Match between the runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) were activated. Human proteome sequences (104,573 entries) downloaded from UniProt (uniprot.org) in May 2024 were used for the database search. Western Blot   Protein aliquots (35 µg) from each sample, prepared in Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad, CA, USA), were loaded onto Tris-glycine gradient gels (4–20%) and separated using a Mini-PROTEAN Tetra Cell chamber (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Electrophoresis was conducted at 60 V for 20 min, followed by 200 V until the tracking dye reached the bottom of the gel. Subsequently, the separated proteins were transferred onto a 0.45 μm nitrocellulose membrane (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) using a semi-dry blotting unit (Biometra, Germany) under a transfer condition of 1 mA/cm². The membrane was blocked (5% BSA in Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20, TBS-T) for 1 h at RT and incubated overnight with primary antibodies to target or reference proteins at 4 °C. Antibodies were diluted in 5% non-fat dry milk. After incubation, the membrane was thoroughly washed with TBS-T 3 times and further incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (#7074, Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA, dilution 1:2,000) or horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (#ab6789; Abcam, UK, 1:2,000) for 2 h at RT. Proteins were detected by chemiluminescence after application of the developing solution according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and visualized using ChemiDoc XRS + system (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Densitometric analysis of protein abundance was accomplished via ImageLab software v6.0 (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Signals were normalized to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, Santa Cruz, TX, USA, sc-166574, dilution 1:750). The following antibodies were used: CD13 (Cell Signaling Technologies, MA, USA, #32720, dilution 1:750) and CD9 (Cell Signaling Technologies, MA, USA, #13403, dilution 1:500). Data Analysis and Bioinformatics   Statistical analysis of proteomic data was done in Perseus v1.6.15 [ 23 ] using ANOVA corrected for multiple testing by permutation followed by Tukey’s posthoc test. The output protein Group table from MaxQuant was filtered for reverse proteins, contaminants, and low-confidence proteins. After log 2  transformation of the LFQ intensities, only proteins with 3 valid values in at least 1 experimental group were retained, and missing values were imputed from a lower range of the normal distribution curve. The principal component analysis (PCA) was used to evaluate sources of variability among samples and replicates.   To determine the statistical significance of cell proliferation parameters, surface markers, pluripotent proteins, and from densitometric evaluation of proteins determined by western blot, we used the Kruskal-Wallis followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test. The significance criterion was a corrected  p  ≤ 0.05 (Bonferroni correction). Statistical analysis was evaluated using Statistic Kingdoms software ( https://www.statskingdom.com/140MeanT2eq.html ).   Next, Gene Ontology (GO) analyses were conducted using the R programming language [ 24 ] and the clusterProfiler package [ 25 – 28 ]. Gene lists, derived from pairwise comparisons of proteomics data, were input into the enrichGO function. This function employs a hypergeometric test to assess whether specific GO terms are significantly over-represented in the target gene list compared to a defined background universe. Analyses were performed separately for the three GO categories—biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC)—using human gene annotations from the org.Hs.eg.db package [ 29 ]. Also, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) for the three GO categories (BP, MF, CC) was performed using the gseGO function from the clusterProfiler package, which leverages a ranked gene list based on log 2  fold-change values to assess the enrichment of GO terms. The resulting enrichment data were visualized with the enrichplot package using ridge plots, tree plots, and heatmaps [ 25 – 28 ]. Results   hMSCs from Different Tissue Sources and HDFa Exhibited Similar Characteristics   Before applying comparative untargeted proteomic analysis, we focused on confirming the fundamental characteristics of MSCs. Human MSCs from 2 different tissue sources (DPSCs and subcutaneous AD-MSCs) and HDFa were cultivated in the same conditions using DMEM-F12 medium. Then, they were validated with reference to ISCT guidelines. Cells were adhered to plastic culture plates and exhibited fibroblast-like shape morphology (Fig.  1 a, Fig.  S1 ). The critical parameter of MSCs quality is the ability to grow and proliferate in vitro. A similar pattern of growth curve was observed for cells from all 3 sources during the first 6 days; in fact, we spotted no significant difference in proliferation dynamics (Fig.  1 b). Even on day 6, when cell expansion showed the greatest distances from each other compared to previous days, the comparison of absorbances showed no significant changes. Cells were harvested for further analysis when they reached ~ 80% confluence. Flow cytometry analyses identified all sources as positive for essential surface mesenchymal stem cell markers CD73, CD90, and CD105 as well as negative for CD45 (Fig.  1 c).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Characterization of HDFa, DPSCs, and AD-MSCs.  a  Representative micrographs taken by phase-contrast microscopy showing the morphologies of cells. Scale bar is 100 μm.  b  Growth curve analysis between day 2 and day 6 using MTT proliferation assay. No significant differences were observed on any day.  c  Flow cytometry analysis of essential CD73, CD90, and CD105 markers contrasting negative marker CD45 showed no significant differences. Data is presented as mean ± SD,  n  = 3 per tissue source The percentage of positive markers was more than 90%, with a negative marker present in less than 1%. HDFa and MSCs revealed the potential to differentiate into a mesodermal lineage. Calcium deposits and lipid-rich vacuoles accumulated within the cells by day 21 following the application of the differentiation medium, indicating osteogenesis and adipogenesis, respectively (Fig.  2 a). Only DPSCs showed no adipogenic differentiation, corresponding to the findings of another research group [ 30 ,  31 ].   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Stemness evaluation of HDFa, DPSCs, and AD-MSCs.  a  Representative images of in vitro differentiation ability on the 21st day of cultivation. Scale bar is 100 μm.  b  Quantification of pluripotency markers via antibody array. Data showed no significant differences. Data are presented as means ± SD,  n  = 3 per tissue source.  c  Representative antibody array Then, the pluripotency of MSCs was confirmed by targeted detection of markers using Proteome Profiler. From the 15 proteins included in the assay, we focused on key proteins of pluripotency such as Oct3/4, Sox2, Nanog, GATA-4, Snail, and higher expressed E-cadherin (Fig.  2 b and c; Fig.  S2 ). Since the concentration of these proteins in the samples is very low (up to 270 µg of protein was required), untargeted proteomics did not detect any of the 15 listed proteins. Our results showed no significant differences in protein abundances between cellular sources. Using the same array, another group [ 32 ] observed significantly higher abundances of E-cadherin, PDX, Sox2, and GSC only in DPSCs; other MSCs showed similar results to our case. Overall, the results described in this section indicated that HDFa, DPSCs, and AD-MSCs are very similar in fundamental characteristics. Deep Untargeted Proteomic Analysis of MSCs   When characteristics of the cell types were established, we proceeded to the comprehensive untargeted analysis of cellular proteomes using nano liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry and data processing in MaxQuant-Perseus, enabling robust and accurate relative quantification and associated statistical analysis. Overall, we identified 4,347 proteins and quantified 3,051 (Table  S1 ). We applied strict statistical filtering ANOVA  Q  ≤ 0.01 followed by Tukey’s  P  ≤ 0.01 and less than 35% coefficient of variation complemented by effect size threshold log 2  ratio ≥ 1. As a result, we revealed 86 differentially accumulated proteins in stem cells of various origins. The pattern of protein abundances showed relevant similarities between HDFa, DPSCs, and AD-MSCs. Principal component analysis of all quantified proteins revealed clustering of biological replicates in two-dimensional space, confirming excellent reproducibility. It indicated that the difference between the proteome of HDFa and other MSCs explained ∼ 20% of data variance in component 2, while component 1 separated AD-MSCs from DPSCs, explaining ∼ 41% of data variance (Fig.  3 ). All 3 stem cell sources were clearly separated, while intrasource variability was much higher than intradonor variability. Differentially abundant proteins were bioinformatically analyzed upon stringent filtering to reveal plausible functional implications.   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Principal component analysis of all quantified proteins for each MSC source ( n  = 3 per tissue source): fib (HDFa), adi (AD-MSCs), and den (DPSCs) Functional Analysis of Differentially Regulated Proteins in HDFa and Adult MSCs by GO Enrichment Analysis   Comparing HDFa and DPSCs, we revealed 23 accumulated and 18 depleted proteins. In contrast, 12 proteins accumulated and 12 proteins depleted in HDFa versus AD-MSCs. Notably, 33 proteins were more abundant, and 34 were less abundant in AD-MSCs than DPSCs. These findings indicate that despite considerable similarities in proteomes, there are also differences in the amount of specific proteins (Table  S1 ). We argue that these proteins might explain key unique features of individual cell lineages. Next, GO enrichment analyses of biological processes were performed on the differentially abundant proteins from each comparison to determine dominant affected functions. We did not find any specific substantial enrichment for HDFa versus AD-MSCs comparison. We observed a very similar pattern, which likely reflects the fact that these two cell types evolved from a common fibroblast progenitor [ 33 ].   For other comparisons, statistically significant proteins were included in pathways, which are depicted in the form of a tree plot (Fig.  S3 a and Fig.  S4 a). Within the tree plot, individual pathways were clustered. Proteins with corresponding abundances that were included in the pathways are depicted in a heat map (Fig.  S3 b and Fig.  S4 b). Accumulated/depleted proteins in the heat maps are visualized in relation to HDFa versus DPSCs or AD-MSCs versus DPSCs. In the first case, GO enrichment revealed 47 biological processes (Fig.  S3 ). Essential GO terms included canonical Wnt signaling pathway (GO:0060070, 3 accumulated and 5 depleted proteins), locomotion (GO:0040011, 11 accumulated and 8 depleted proteins), ossification (GO:0001503, 4 accumulated and 3 depleted proteins), tissue development (GO:0009888, 6 accumulated and 7 depleted proteins), regulation of BMP signaling pathway (GO:0030509, 2 accumulated and 2 depleted proteins), and regulation of MAP kinase activity (GO:0043405, 2 accumulated and 2 depleted proteins). For deeper insight into functional patterns we made GO enrichment separately for accumulated and depleted proteins, consequently only 30 biological processes downregulated in HDFa compared to DPSCs (Fig.  4 ). These processes were grouped into 5 clusters: #1 proliferation, adhesion, and signal transduction; #2 cell junction, chemotaxis, and morphogenesis; #3 locomotion, migration, and motility; #4 Wnt signaling pathway; #5 proliferation, JNK cascade, and digestive system development. In AD-MSCs versus DPSCs comparison, GO enrichment analysis revealed 18 biological processes (Fig.  S4 ). Essential GO terms included extracellular matrix organization (GO:0030198, 7 accumulated, 2 depleted), regulation of canonical Wnt signaling pathway (GO:0060828, 3 accumulated, 4 depleted), vasculature development (GO:0001944, 11 accumulated, 1 depleted), and cell migration (GO:0016477, 11 accumulated, 8 depleted). Split GO enrichment analysis revealed only 18 biological processes upregulated in AD-MSCs compared to DPSCs (Fig.  5 ). These processes were grouped into 5 clusters: #1 circulatory system development, #2 angiogenesis, #3 embryonic development, #4 extracellular structure organization, and #5 appendage development.   Fig. 4.     Open in a new tab   GO enrichment analysis of downregulated biological processes from the comparison of HDFa versus DPSCs. Pathways with integrated significant proteins were visualized.  a  Tree plot with the color gradient related to the  P -value level of significance.  b  Heat plot with the color gradient related to the log 2  fold change. Clusters 1–5 represent grouped pathways: #1 proliferation, adhesion, and signal transduction; #2 cell junction, chemotaxis, and morphogenesis; #3 locomotion, migration, and motility; #4 Wnt signaling pathway; #5 proliferation, JNK cascade, and digestive system development Fig. 5.     Open in a new tab   GO enrichment analysis of upregulated biological processes from the comparison of AD-MSCs versus DPSCs. Pathways with integrated significant proteins were visualized.  a  Tree plot with the color gradient related to the  P -value level of significance.  b  Heat plot with the color gradient related to the log 2  fold change. Clusters 1–5 represent grouped pathways: #1 circulatory system development, #2 angiogenesis, #3 embryonic development, #4 extracellular structure organization, and #5 appendage development Functional Analysis of HDFa and Adult MSCs by GSEA   Next, we analyzed proteomic data using a complementary approach—gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). This method allows detecting coordinated patterns of protein abundance changes. It analyzes ranked lists of proteins without pre-filtering based on statistical significance. By ranking proteins based on their log 2  fold changes, GSEA evaluates whether specific protein sets are accumulated or depleted without a hard threshold. The authors suggested using the complete ranked gene list in GSEA because this approach captures subtle yet coordinated shifts in gene expression across a set of genes that may be overlooked when only statistically significant genes are analyzed, thereby better reflecting the underlying biological correlation with the phenotypic class