>Materials and methods   Strains and growth conditions   The strains used in this study and their sources are listed in  File S1 . Vogel’s medium (supplemented with 2% sucrose for slants, and with 2% glucose for plates and liquid culture) was used to culture  Neurospora crassa  strains and solidified with 1.5% agar as required. Sorbose plates (Vogel’s medium supplemented with 2% sorbose, 0.05% fructose, and 0.05% glucose) were employed for electroporation transformation. All cultures were grown at 28°C.  Aspergillus fumigatus  strains were cultured on the complete medium (CM) at 37°C, solidified with 1.5% agar  [29] . 5 mM uridine and uracil were added when  A. fumigatus  CEA17 or the revertant strain was grown.  Cryptococcus neoformans  H99 was cultured at 30°C on yeast extract-peptone-dextrose (YPD) medium, solidified with 1.5% agar  [30] . Total RNA extraction and quantitative RT-PCR   For  N. crassa , the samples for RNA extraction were performed as previously described  [31] . Sterol biosynthesis inhibitors, including ketoconazole (Sigma-Aldrich, United States), terbinafine (J&K, China), and amorolfine (TCI, Japan), were added at final concentrations of 1.5, 2.5, and 0.375 μg/mL, respectively. Subsequently, the obtained mycelium was harvested and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.   For  A. fumigatus , fresh conidia at a final concentration of 1×10 6  were inoculated into 100 mL liquid CM medium and grown at 37°C and 200 rpm for 12 h. Subsequently, the mycelium was treated with sterol biosynthesis inhibitors for 6 h before harvesting. Sterol biosynthesis inhibitors include ketoconazole, terbinafine, and amorolfine, with final concentrations of 0.25, 1.8, and 10 μg/mL, respectively. Due to the impact on sporulation in the  A. fumigatus erg5 KO  strain, 10 mycelial plugs (approximately 1–2 mm 2 ) from the unsporulated edges of colonies grown on plates replaced the conidial suspension. The CEA17 COM  strain was used as a control for the  A. fumigatus erg5 KO  strain and subjected to the same procedure.   For  C. neoformans , fresh cells at a final concentration of 1×10 6  were inoculated into 100 mL liquid YPD medium and grown at 30°C and 200 rpm for 18 h, and then treated with sterol biosynthesis inhibitors for 12 h. The cells were harvested by centrifuge and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Sterol biosynthesis inhibitors include ketoconazole, terbinafine, and amorolfine, with final concentrations of 4, 10, and 20 μg/mL, respectively.   Total RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and qRT-PCR were performed as previously described  [31] . Gene-specific primers were designed and listed in  File S1 . The expression level of each  erg  gene was normalized by the expression level of  β-tubulin  in  N. crassa ,  actin  in  A. fumigatus , and  TEF1  in  C. neoformans . Error bars represent the standard error of the mean, n = 3. RNA-seq and data analysis   The transcriptomic profiles of  N. crassa  strains were analyzed by high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Sample preparation and RNA extraction were conducted as described above. The total RNA samples underwent RNA quality control, sequencing library construction, single-end RNA-sequencing (BGIseq-500RS platform), and data processing at the Beijing Genomics Institute (Wuhan, China). The reference genomic sequences of  N. crassa  were obtained from FungiDB. Genes with FPKM values < 5 in all samples were considered low-abundance genes and were removed before further analysis. Differentially expressed genes were identified based on expression changes between two samples > 2 or < 0.5, with a q-value (adjusted  P -value) < 0.05. Functional category enrichment analysis and pathway enrichment analysis were performed using DAVID ( https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp ).   Gene set enrichment analysis was conducted using GSEA 4.3.2. The expression dataset of all detected genes for each mutant strain was imported and analyzed in GSEA with 10,000 permutations to identify enriched pathways. The enriched pathways with normalized enrichment score (NES) greater than 1 and adjusted  P -value (adj.  P ) less than 0.05 were considered significant. HPLC-MS/MS analysis of sterol profiles   Samples for sterol extraction were prepared in the same manner as for RNA extraction. Subsequently, the mycelial samples were lyophilized for 24 h, followed by grinding into fine powder for sterol extraction and HPLC-MS/MS analysis, as previously described  [20] . An ergosterol standard (J&K, China) was utilized as a control. Posaconazole (Macklin, China) at a final concentration of 5 μg/mL was added as an internal reference during the sterol extraction procedure for subsequent calculation of the relative content of the sterol fraction. Construction of knockout strains of  N. crassa     Construction of double knockout strains of  N. crassa  was achieved through sexual crossing. The sexual crossing procedure followed methods described in a previous study  [32] . The Homokaryons of  N. crassa  were purified from initial heterokaryotic strains using microconidial isolation  [33] .   Deletion of  ncSR  was performed with homologous recombination method, using hygromycin B resistance gene  hph  as the selective marker. Briefly, primers were used to amplify the promoter of the  ncSR  gene (510-bp), the coding sequence of gene  hph  (1450-bp), the terminator of the  ncSR  gene (619-bp), and the plasmid backbone fragment. These fragments were then assembled into the plasmid pCSN-KO-NcSR using the One Step Cloning Kit (Vazyme, China). The knockout fragment, comprising the  ncSR  gene promoter, the  hph  fragment, and the  ncSR  gene terminator, was amplified with primers T7/3 and purified via gel extraction. The purified knockout fragment was introduced into  N. crassa  N85 ( bd Ku70 RIP ) strain via electroporation  [34] . Transformants were screened by cultivation on Vogel’s slants containing 150 μg/mL hygromycin B (Amresco, United States) and verified by PCR. Subsequently, the obtained deletion mutant was crossed with the  N. crassa  wild-type strain (FGSC#2225) to eliminate the genetic background of  bd  and  Ku70 RIP  mutations. All primers used to construct and verify the  ncSR  knockout strain were listed in  File S1 . Deletion of  erg5  in  A. fumigatus     The deletion of  erg5  (Afu1g03950) in  A. fumigatus  was achieved by gene replacement via double homologous recombination events using the orotidine-5′-phosphate decarboxylase gene ( pyrG ) as a selectable marker  [29] . Briefly, primers were used to amplify several fragments: the promoter of the Af erg5  gene (1616-bp), the coding sequence of gene  pyrG  (3881-bp), the terminator of Af erg5  gene (1599-bp), and the plasmid backbone fragment. These fragments were assembled into the plasmid pCSN-KO-AfERG5 using the One Step Cloning Kit (Vazyme, China). The knockout fragment, comprising the Af erg5  gene promoter, the  pyrG  fragment, and the Afe rg5  gene terminator, was amplified with T7/3 primers and purified through gel extraction. Subsequently, this knockout fragment was introduced into the  A. fumigatus  uracil-auxotrophic strain (CEA17) via protoplast transformation. Positive transformants were selected based on their auxotrophic phenotype and verified by PCR. All primers used for construction and validation are listed in  File S1 . Construction of relevant complementation strains in  N. crassa     The plasmid pCB1532, containing the chlorimuron ethyl resistance gene, was utilized to construct plasmids pCOM-sGFP-SAH2, pCOM-AtrR-sGFP, and pCOM-NcSR, intended for complementing  sah-2 KO ,  atrR KO , and  ncSR KO  strains, respectively. Briefly, specific fragments were amplified and purified: the 2,162-bp upstream regulatory region of  sah-2 , the 717-bp sGFP coding sequence, and a 4,709-bp fragment encompassing the  sah-2  coding sequence and its downstream region. These fragments were inserted into pCB1532 digested by XbaI and KpnI through the One Step Cloning Kit (Vazyme, China), resulting in plasmid pCOM-sGFP-SAH2. Similarly, a 5,777-bp fragment containing the upstream regulatory region and the coding sequence of  atrR , a 747-bp sGFP coding sequence, and a 1,524-bp downstream region of  atrR  were assembled into pCB1532 using the same cloning method, producing plasmid pCOM-AtrR-sGFP. For pCOM-NcSR, a 5,413-bp fragment containing the  ncSR  coding sequence flanked by its upstream and downstream regions was amplified and inserted into pCB1532 digested with XpnI and KpnI by a one-step cloning kit.   Likewise, pCB1532 was employed in the construction of the plasmid pCOM-Tef1-sGFP-NcSR-TrpC for generating the sGFP-NcSR strain. Briefly, the 923-bp promoter sequence of the  tef-1 , the 783-bp sGFP coding sequence, the 1,668-bp coding sequence  ncSR , and the 774-bp terminator of the  trpC  were amplified, purified, and inserted into the pCB1532 digested with XbaI and KpnI through a one-step cloning kit.   The pCOM-sGFP-SAH2, pCOM-AtrR-sGFP, pCOM-NcSR, and pCOM-Tef1-sGFP-NcSR-TrpC were introduced into their respective knockout strains using the electroporation method, as previously described  [20] . Positive transformants were selected on the medium supplemented with 15 μg/mL chlorimuron ethyl (Sigma-Aldrich, United States) and were further confirmed by PCR. All primers used for construction and validation were listed in  File S1 . Phenotypic analysis of mutants   The susceptibility test for  N. crassa  strains followed established procedures  [20] . Briefly, two microliters of the conidial suspension (2×10 6  conidia/mL) were inoculated onto Vogel’s medium plates, with or without inhibitors. The inhibitors used included 2.5 µg/mL terbinafine, 1.5 µg/mL ketoconazole, 0.375 µg/mL amorolfine, 1 µg/mL lovastatin (Sigma-Aldrich, United States), 0.5 µg/mL voriconazole (Selleck, United States), 0.04 µg/mL amphotericin B (Beyotime, China), 1 µg/mL caspofungin (APExBIO, United States), 100 µg/mL polyoxinB (DR.E, Germany), 20 ng/mL myriocin (Enzo, United States), 75 µg/mL rotenone (Sigma-Aldrich, United States), 75 ng/mL oligomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, United States), 2 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, United States), 0.5 µg/mL menadione (Selleck, United States). All the plates were incubated at 28°C for at least 24 h. Similarly,  A. fumigatus  conidia (2×10 6  conidia/mL) were inoculated onto CM plates, with or without inhibitors, followed by incubation at 37°C.  C. neoformans  cells from fresh liquid cultures were washed and diluted to 10 7 , 10 6 , 10 5 , and 10 4  cells/mL. Two microliters of the cell suspension were inoculated onto YPD plates containing or lacking inhibitors and incubated at 30°C. To facilitate a more accurate comparison and microscopic observation of  N. crassa  growth under inhibitory conditions, an extended incubation period was employed.   Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) were determined by microliquid-based dilution according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M38-A2 protocol. A final concentration of 2 × 10 4  conidia/mL spore suspension was incubated with varying concentrations of sterol biosynthesis inhibitor for 24 h at 28 °C in Vogel's liquid medium. The status of spore germination was assessed microscopically, supplemented by 10 % Alamarblue (Invitrogen, United States) for cell viability. MIC values were determined per the standard established by CLSI. The experiments were repeated three times independently.   For fluorescent microscopic observation of GFP-tag strains, spore suspensions (2 × 10 6  conidia/mL) were germinated for 5 h at 28 °C, 200 rpm. Subsequently, the germinated spores were treated with 1.5 µg/mL ketoconazole or 0.375 µg/mL amorolfine for 2–3 h, followed by staining with Hoechst 33342 (Beyotime, China) for 10 min. After staining, the germlings were washed thrice with liquid Vogel's minimal medium before fluorescent microscopic observation.   To evaluate sporulation capacity, a 50 µL spore suspension (2×10 6  conidia/mL) was inoculated into slants containing 2 mL Vogel's medium and cultured in darkness for 9 days. Subsequently, formed spores were washed and counted. Phenotypes of sexual development were analyzed as previously described  [32] . Drug sensitivity phenotypic profiling of collected  N. crassa  transcription factor mutants   The drug sensitivity phenotypic profiling of transcription factor mutants to sterol biosynthesis inhibitors was analyzed by referring to the broth dilution method. Briefly, a spore suspension with a final concentration of 2×10 4  conidia/mL was incubated in Vogel's liquid medium containing sterol biosynthesis inhibitors at 28°C for 36 h, followed by an additional 4 h of incubation with 10% Alamarblue. Ketoconazole concentrations used in the screen were 0.75 µg/mL, 1.5 µg/mL, and 3 µg/mL, representing 0.5, 1, and 2 times the MIC, respectively. Similarly, amorolfine concentrations were set at 0.1875 µg/mL, 0.375 µg/mL, and 0.75 µg/mL, and terbinafine concentrations were set at 1.25 µg/mL, 2.5 µg/mL, and 5 µg/mL. Conidia cultured in Vogel's liquid medium without inhibitors were used as a blank control. The experiment was performed in duplicate. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR analysis   ChIP was performed following a previously described protocol with some modifications  [35] . Briefly, Immunoprecipitation was carried out using the rabbit polyclonal anti-GPF antibody (ab290, Abcam, UK; 1:500 dilution) and protein G magnetic beads (P2106, Beyotime, China). Immunoprecipitation using rabbit IgG magnetic beads (P2173, Beyotime, China) was used as a control. After washing with low salt buffer, high salt buffer, LiCl buffer, and TE buffer, DNA was eluted from the magnetic beads and then precipitated by glycogen after de-crosslinking, RNase A treatment, and protease K digestion. The DNA solution was subsequently analyzed using quantitative PCR, employing primers ( File S1 ) specifically designed for the targeted regions within the promoters. The fragment in coding sequences of the gene served as the control region for the analysis. ChIP-qPCR was performed three times. Results   Sterol biosynthesis genes respond differently to ergosterol biosynthesis inhibitors in  Neurospora crassa     To test our hypothesis, we conducted further investigations informed by our previous results in  N. crassa  that several  erg  genes exhibited varied transcriptional responses to different kinds of ergosterol biosynthesis inhibitors  [20] . We first analyzed genome-wide gene expression profiles of  N. crassa  treated with three distinct sterol biosynthesis inhibitors (SBIs): terbinafine (TERB) targeting squalene epoxidase ERG1, ketoconazole (KTC) targeting sterol C14 demethylase ERG11, and amorolfine (AMO) targeting sterol C14 reductase ERG24/sterol C8 isomerase ERG2. Each SBI inhibited the hyphal extension of the wild-type  N. crassa  strain at the minimum inhibitory concentration ( Fig. S1 A). Sterol profiling revealed that each SBI reduced ergosterol content and led to the accumulation of specific sterol intermediates ( Fig. S1 B).   RNA-seq analysis revealed diverse genome-wide transcriptional changes induced by these inhibitors ( Fig. 1 A). Unexpectedly, despite the unique effects of each SBI, a substantial number of genes (893 genes) were commonly affected by all three inhibitors ( Fig. 1 B). GO enrichment analysis suggests that these genes likely correspond to general stress responses, possibly related with impaired membrane functions due to abnormal sterol biosynthesis ( File S2 ). Except that, a series of genes were found to be specifically affected by each SBI ( Fig. 1 B). Sterol biosynthesis genes, which are required for adaptation to sterol biosynthesis inhibition, were enriched among genes specifically upregulated by ketoconazole or amorolfine, as revealed by pathway enrichment analysis ( Fig. S2  and  File S2 ), indicating differential responses of  erg  genes to distinct inhibitors. KTC treatment dramatically induced the expression of  erg11 ,  erg6,  and  erg24 , while AMO treatment significantly induced  erg24 ,  erg2 ,  erg25,  and  erg3  ( Fig. 1 C). In contrast, TERB treatment did not induce these  erg  genes. These results were further confirmed by qRT-PCR ( Fig. S1 C). For comparison with responses typically seen in ergosterol-mediated feedback regulation, we also analyzed the responses of  erg  genes to the three SBIs in  Cryptococcus neoformans . As with  N. crassa , the growth of wild-type  C. neoformans  strain was inhibited by SBIs, resulting in reduced ergosterol content and the accumulation of sterol intermediates ( Fig. S1 D and E). However, not like in  N. crassa , treatments with different SBIs induced consistent transcriptional responses of  erg  genes ( Fig. S1 F), representing the canonical ergosterol-mediated feedback regulation.   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Sterol biosynthesis genes exhibit distinct responses to inhibitions of ergosterol biosynthesis in N. crassa . A  Gene expression profile of  N. crassa  treated with 2.5 µg/mL terbinafine (TERB), 1.5 µg/mL ketoconazole (KTC), or 0.375 µg/mL amorolfine (AMO) for 12 h. The heatmap was generated to display only those genes that exhibited an FPKM value greater than 5 in at least one sample. The heatmap was meticulously constructed using Tbtools  [58] , following data processing steps of FPKM log2 transformation, column scaling by Z score, and clustering based on column similarity.  B  Venn analysis of genes affected by sterol biosynthesis inhibitors in  N. crassa . Differentially expressed genes were identified based on expression changes between two samples > 2 or < 0.5, with a q-value (adjusted P-value) < 0.05.  C  Heatmap depicting the expression of ergosterol biosynthesis genes in  N. crassa  treated with different sterol biosynthesis inhibitors. The values labeled in the heatmap represent the logarithm of the fold change in FPKM values following different treatments. The putative ergosterol biosynthesis pathway in  N. crassa  is shown on the right side.  D  Expression levels of ergosterol biosynthesis genes in  N. crassa  at 0 h, 1 h, 3 h, 6 h, 12 h, and 24 h of SBIs treatment using qRT-PCR. The treatment conditions were the same as in (A). The expression level of each gene at 0 h was referred to 1.  E  Expression levels of ergosterol biosynthesis genes were analyzed by qRT-PCR in  N. crassa erg24 KO  ,  erg2 KO  ,  erg3 KO  (double deletion of  erg3A  and  erg3B ),  erg5 KO  , and  erg4 KO  strains. The expression level of each gene in the wild-type strain was referred to 1. The P-value was calculated by ANOVA with Dunn’s correction. n = 3. To further characterize these responses in  N. crassa , we investigated the kinetics of the aforementioned  erg  genes treated with the three SBIs through time-course experiments. Notably, after 3 h of KTC treatment, the transcript levels of both  erg11  and  erg6  exhibited significant induction. However, the expression of  erg11  peaked at 6 h and remained steady at 12 and 24 h, whereas the expression of  erg6  continued to increase even after 24 h of KTC treatment ( Fig. 1 D). This observation underscores the existence of distinct responses in responsive  erg  genes even under the same conditions. Upon AMO treatment, the transcript levels of  erg24 ,  erg2 ,  erg25, erg3A,  and  erg3B  were promptly upregulated at around 12 h, followed by a significant decrease at 24 h ( Fig. 1 D and  Fig. S3 ). The transcript level of  erg1  fluctuated gently without significant change across all the examined time points and conditions ( Fig. S3 ). Thus, although all SBIs lead to the depletion of ergosterol, the transcriptional responses of  erg  genes to each SBI are distinct in  N. crassa . Differential inhibitions in sterol biosynthesis steps are responsible for the varied responses of  erg  genes   We previously demonstrated that the knockdown of  erg11  dramatically induced  erg6  and  erg24 , resembling the effect of KTC treatment  [20] . To further confirm whether the transcriptional responses of the aforementioned  erg  genes are directly associated with the inhibition of ergosterol biosynthesis, we investigated the expression of  erg  genes in the deletion mutants of  erg24  and  erg2 , which encode the targets of AMO. Similar to AMO treatment, deletion of  erg24  (or  erg2 ) significantly upregulated  erg2  (or  erg24 ),  erg25 ,  erg3A , and  erg3B , but not  erg6 , while  erg11  was only slightly induced in  erg24  or  erg2  mutants ( Fig. 1 E). Additional examination was conducted in the deletion mutants of  erg3  (where both  erg3A  and  erg3B  were deleted),  erg4 , and  erg5  ( Fig. 1 E). Only  erg11  and  erg1  showed a modest upregulation, reaching a maximum of approximately 3 folds in  erg5  mutant or  erg4  mutant. None of the tested sterol biosynthesis genes exhibited differential expression in the  erg3  mutant compared to the wild-type strain. Overall, disturbing various steps in ergosterol biosynthesis in  N. crassa , either by chemical inhibitors or through  erg  gene deletions, can elicit distinct transcriptional responses of  erg  genes. The transcriptional regulation of  erg  genes in  N. crassa  involves distinct transcription factors   Different transcriptional responses to diverse SBIs hint that distinct key transcription factors underlay the regulation of ergosterol biosynthesis ( Fig. S4 A). Based on this presumption, we screened a collection of 258  N. crassa  transcription factor deletion mutants to identify key transcription factors for drug sensitivity against the three SBIs used in our study, using the broth dilution method as outlined in the schematic diagram ( Fig. 2 B). As expected, distinct transcription factor knockout mutants indeed exhibited altered drug sensitivity to different sterol biosynthesis inhibitors ( Fig. 2 A and  File S3 ). Among them,  sah-2  (NCU04731),  atrR  (NCU01478), and  ncSR  (NCU08594) garnered attention due to their most prominent mutant phenotypes. More interestingly, SAH-2 is the SREBP homolog in  N. crassa , AtrR is the homolog of  A. fumigatus  AtrR, and NcSR is the homolog of FgSR. Deletion of  sah-2  or  atrR  resulted in a hypersensitive phenotype to AMO, rendering the strain nonviable upon AMO treatment with no hyphal growth ( Fig. 2 C). The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for each strain to AMO was 4–8 times or 5–10 times lower than that of the WT, respectively ( Fig. 2 D). However, their deletion did not alter the sensitivity to KTC and TERB. Consistently, the knockout of  sah-2  or  atrR  significantly affected the responses of  erg24  and  erg2  to AMO, as well as KTC, but did not impact the response of  erg11  ( Fig. 2 E and F). In contrast, the deletion of  ncSR  resulted in a hypersensitive phenotype to KTC but not to AMO and TERB ( Fig. 2 C). The MIC for  ncSR  deletion mutant to KTC was 4–10 times lower than that of WT ( Fig. 2 D). Gene expression analysis showed that the deletion of  ncSR  abolished the response of  erg11  to KTC without affecting the expression of  erg24  and  erg2  ( Fig. 2 G).   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Different transcription factors participate in the transcriptional regulation of ergosterol biosynthesis genes in  N. crassa . A  Venn network illustrating transcription factors whose deletion resulted in altered sensitivity to sterol biosynthesis inhibitors. Detailed results are presented in File S