>Materials and Methods   Patient cohorts   As described in  Figure 1A , molecular, metabolic, immune, and microbiome profiling were performed on several independent cohorts of metastatic melanoma tumor specimens. These included the TCGA cohort for somatic DNA studies (TCGA, n=202), 4 cohorts for bulk RNA sequencing (TCGA, n=202; Gide, n=68; Hugo, n=26; MDA, n=61), the TCGA cohort for reverse phase protein array (n=202), the University of Pittsburgh cohort for Seahorse Extracellular Flux Assay on patient tumor biopsies (UPMC, n=37), MDA patient-derived cell lines for Seahorse Extracellular Flux Assay (n=17), a TCGA cohort for direct metabolite measurement by LC/MS (n=36), 2 cohorts for IHC testing of immune cells and co-stimulatory/co-inhibitory molecules (Gide, n=83; MDA, n=61), and a distinct MDA cohort for fecal microbiome studies (n=272). For all patients, BMI at time of sample collection was calculated as patient’s weight in kilograms divided by their height in meters squared and categorized into obese (OB, BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 ), overweight (OW, 25 kg/m 2 ≤ BMI < 30 kg/m 2 ), and normal weight (NL, BMI < 25 kg/m 2 ). For the TCGA melanoma cohort,( 18 ) we selected a uniform cohort of non-recurrent regionally metastatic melanoma specimens for analysis. We filtered to include patients with biospecimen tissue sites from regional lymph node or regional subcutaneous metastases and excluded patients presenting with stage IV disease. Then, to exclude patients with recurrent stage III disease, we excluded all patients for whom the number of days from the diagnosis of the primary to the accession date was more than 90 days. We downloaded RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) expression and whole exome sequencing (WES data from the TCGA data portal ( www.tcgaportal.org ). We obtained BMI from the TCGA clinical database where available (n=121) and obtained BMI from the original contributing center where feasible (n=81), resulting in n=202 samples available for analysis ( Supplementary Table 1 ). We additionally obtained BMI data for two previously published melanoma tumor profiling datasets, the University of California Los Angeles cohort (RNASeq, Hugo, n=26)( 19 ), and the Melanoma Institute of Australia cohort [RNASeq, n=68, and immunohistochemistry (IHC), Gide, n=83]( 20 ). We additionally performed RNASeq and IHC for immune markers on resected melanoma lung, liver, or bowel metastases with available BMI from MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDA, n=61). The Institutional Review Board approved the request to analyze tumor tissue from all tumor tissue collection and subsequent analyses. Written informed consent was obtained from patients at time of initial biospecimen collection at the primary institution. The study was conducted in accordance with recognized ethical guidelines (Declaration of Helsinki, CIOMS, The Belmont Report, and the US Common Rule). Baseline characteristics, including sex, age, site of tumor tissue, BMI group, and prior systemic therapy, are described in  Supplementary Table 1 .   Figure 1:     Open in a new tab   Overview of studies performed by cohort and somatic DNA studies by body mass index.   A. Overview of analyses performed by cohort. BMI = body mass index, OW = overweight, OB = obese, NL = normal, TCGA = The Cancer Genome Atlas, MDA = MD Anderson Cancer Center, RPPA = reverse phase protein array, LC/MS = liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry, IHC = immunohistochemistry.   B. Oncoplot depicting somatic DNA alterations in regionally metastatic melanoma from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort by BMI and sex. At the top of the figure, the vertical bar from 1–10 shows the number of alterations by individual patient. In the second to bottom row, blue indicates males and red indicates females. In the bottom row, green indicates normal (NL) BMI and yellow indicates overweight/obese (OW/OB) BMI. In the middle rows, the numbers to the left are the frequency of alterations in each gene listed to the right. For these middle rows, green is a missense mutation, red is a nonsense mutation, purple is a frameshift insertion, blue is a frameshift deletion, orange is a splice site alteration, and black is multi-hit.   C. Tumor mutation burden by body mass index (BMI) in regionally metastatic melanoma from TCGA cohort. Somatic alteration analysis   For somatic mutation analysis of the TCGA cohort, we used the chi-squared test to perform enrichment analysis on mutations of individual genes of OW/OB vs NL. We also performed the differential analysis on somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) for each gene by t-test. Significance was set at a false discover rate (FDR) of <0.2 which was not met for any genes. An oncoplot was generated based on the top 20 significantly mutated genes (SMGs) in the melanoma TCGA.( 18 ) The differential analysis of tumor mutation burden (TMB) between OW/OB and NL BMI patients was performed by Wilcox test. For mutational signature analysis, we first quantified contribution of the signatures based on the patient mutational profiles. We then performed differential analysis on relative contribution for each signature between OW/OB and NL by t-test. Significance was set at a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.2 under which no significant signature was identified. The mutational signature matrix was downloaded from COSMIC ( https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/assets/signatures_probabilities.txt ). The R library we used for the analysis was “MutationalPatterns”. RNA sequencing   For the MDA cohort, archived paraffin embedded tissue specimens were collected from 61 patients with metastatic melanoma. Sections from paraffin-embedded tissue were reviewed for pathologic diagnosis and dissected, if necessary, to ensure that ≥ 90% of the sample represented tumor. Total cellular RNA was isolated from tissue sections using the High Pure RNA isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Germany) following de-paraffinization and proteinase K treatment. Gene set enrichment analyses (GSEA)   For the GSEA, RNA-seq count matrix from different datasets (MDA, TCGA, Gide, Hugo) were merged and batch-corrected by R package sva v3.36.0 ComBat_seq() function. The corrected count matrix were analyzed by R package DESeq2 v1.28.1 for differential gene expression (DGE) analysis among different BMI groups. In addition to DGE analysis on all four batch-corrected datasets (labeled as All), DGE analysis with each of different covariates controlled in DESeq2 modelling (labeled as Ctrl Sex, Ctrl Dataset, and Ctrl Tissue) was performed by using DESeqDataSetFromMatrix() function (e.g., design = ~ Sex + BMI)( Supplementary Table 2 ). DGE analysis on each of subgroups (Sex: Female, Male; Dataset: MDA, TCGA, Gide, Hugo; and Tissue: lymph node (LN), subcutaneous metastasis (SC), lung) was also performed ( Supplementary Table 3 ). The gene rank lists from DGE analysis were used for GSEA by R package fgsea v1.14.0. The gene lists of hallmark pathways and KEGG pathways were downloaded from MSigDB v7.4 ( http://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/index.jsp ). The results were plotted by R packages ggplot v3.3.3 and ComplexHeatmap v2.4.3. The enriched pathways with adjusted p values (p adj ) and normalized enrichment score (NES) were visualized. Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis   For RPPA analysis, the TCGA RPPA dataset was obtained from the TCPA data portal ( www.tcpaportal.org ), and we calculated the scores of the protein pathways based on the weighted average of the member protein RPPA levels.( 21 ) The differential analysis between OW/OB and NL was performed for each pathway by t-test. Direct metabolic profiling studies   We performed direct metabolic profiling studies for tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolites on tumor tissue from 36 patients with regionally metastatic melanoma who were part of the TCGA melanoma cohort and had fresh frozen specimens at MDA available for analysis. Metabolites were extracted from tissue samples using the extraction procedure described previously( 22 , 23 ) and analyzed using a 6495 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) coupled to a HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) via single reaction monitoring. The data were log2-transformed and normalized with internal standards on a per-sample, per-method basis. Statistical analyses were performed with t-Test in R Studio (R Studio Inc., Boston, MA). Differential metabolites were identified by adjusting the p-values for multiple testing at a FDR threshold of < 0.25.   Tumor cells from patient tissue samples metabolic output was measured by Seahorse technology as previously described.( 15 ) We performed assessment of oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) in 37 fresh frozen melanoma specimens from the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Samples were categorized by BMI at the time of resection. Differential analysis of OCR and ECAR by BMI category was performed using the unpaired T test. Samples were also categorized using median values of ECAR and OCR and Fischer’s exact test used to calculate proportion of samples in “low ECAR/low OCR” vs “other.”   Metabolic output was also measured by Seahorse in patient-derived melanoma cell lines (n=17), maintained as low passage cell lines. Patient-derived melanoma cell lines were established according to previously described protocols.( 24 ) All melanoma cell lines were maintained in RPMI 1640 complete medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biologicals, Flowery Branch, GA) and normocin (Invitrogen). All cell lines were verified by short tandem repeat fingerprinting or matching mutational profiles. Cells were routinely monitored for Mycoplasma contamination by using the MycoAlert Kit (Lonza). Cells were counted blindly by two independent investigators and seeded at a density of 2 × 10E4 cells/well in XF96 plates and allowed to stabilize overnight. ECAR and OCR were next measured by the Seahorse XF96 analyzer as described in manufacturer’s instructions for the XF cell mito stress. The results were analyzed using Wave software (Seahorse/Agilent). The OCR and ECAR levels of tumors after adding FCCP were used to determine the mitochondrial metabolism at maximal respiration condition. Immune cell studies   The levels of key immune markers by BMI was assessed using IHC in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) melanoma samples in two cohorts, the Gide and MDA cohorts. The methodology for the Gide cohort was previously described.( 20 ) For the MDA cohort, IHC studies were performed on 4 µm formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections using a Leica BOND RXm autostainer. Slides were stained with antibodies targeting human CD3 (Agilent #A045201–2, 1:100), CD4[4B12] (Leica #NCL-L-CD4–368, 1:80), CD8[C8/144B] (Thermo Fisher #MS457S), CD45RO[UCHL1] (Leica #PA0146, RTU), CD68[PG-M1] (Agilent #M087629–2, 1:450), FoxP3[206D] (BioLegend #320102, 1:50), Granzyme B[11F1] (Leica #PA0291, RTU) , LAG3[D2G40] (Cell Signaling #15372, 1:100), PD1[EPR4877(2)] (Abcam #ab137132), and PD-L1[E1L3N] (Cell Signaling #13684, 1:100) using a modified version of either the standard Leica Bond DAB “F” or red “J” IHC protocols. Slides stained for CD4 and PD-L1 were scored by a board-certified pathologist and given an H-score based on percentage and intensity of positivity. All other analyses were performed using Aperio automated analysis as previously described.( 25 ) Differential analysis of immune cell populations was performed using the Mann-Whitney U test. Fecal microbiome studies   We analyzed the fecal baseline microbial abundance data by 16S rRNA sequencing from the subset of stage III/IV cutaneous patients with metastatic melanoma (n=371) from our previously published MD Anderson melanoma microbiome cohort.( 7 ) We examined in-sample microbial diversity using the alpha-diversity measure and analyzed its association with BMI using an ANOVA analysis after adjusting for sex and age. Beta-diversity was used to measure microbial diversity between samples based on the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. Each sample is represented by ordination plots based upon the top two principal components extracted from Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) and PERMANOVA analysis with 999 permutations used to examine the impact of BMI on beta-diversity, again controlling for age and sex. Data and Materials Availability Statement   BMI data corresponding to publicly available genomic profiling (TCGA, Gide, Hugo cohorts) for which BMI was obtained from the contributing investigators to these datasets are provided as  Supplementary Table 4  as is the full RNAseq data for the MDACC cohort ( Supplementary Table 5 ) and differential gene expression analyses results for the integrated analyses. The fecal microbiome data and corresponding BMI are publicly available. Direct metabolic and immune profiling data is available upon request from corresponding author. Results   An overview of the analyses performed on the multiple cohorts included in this study is provided for reference ( Figure 1A ). We began by evaluating somatic DNA alterations by BMI in patients with regionally metastatic melanoma included in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) melanoma cohort (n=202)( 18 ) ( Supplementary Table 6 ). BMI was not associated with the prevalence of DNA mutations or copy number variations of any gene, including known driver oncogenes (e.g. BRAF and NRAS) and tumor suppressors ( Figure 1B ), nor with mutational signatures. There was also no difference in estimated tumor mutational burden (TMB), which has been associated with response to ICI, between OW/OB (BMI ≥ 25) and normal (NL, BMI < 25) BMI patients ( Figure 1C ).( 26 )   To assess for associations of BMI with gene expression, we performed a gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of an expanded cohort of melanoma metastases analyzed by RNAseq, including the TCGA regionally metastatic melanoma cohort (n=202)( 18 ), as well as cohorts reported by Hugo (n=26)( 19 ) and Gide (n=68)( 20 ), and a new MD Anderson Cancer Center cohort (MDA, n=61,  Supplementary Table 1 ). We performed an integrated GSEA of these 4 cohorts, correcting for batch effects, to compare mRNA expression of 50 hallmark pathways between OW/OB and NL BMI patients ( Figure 2 ). Across the integrated cohort, we observed downregulation of metabolic pathways in OW/OB tumors, including oxidative phosphorylation [OXPHOS, p adj  < 0.01, normalized enrichment score (NES) −2.11] and glycolysis (p adj  < 0.1, NES −1.45). Myogenesis (p adj  < 0.01, NES −1.91), adipogenesis (p adj  < 0.01, NES – 1.78), reactive oxygen species (p adj  < 0.1, NES −1.58), and hypoxia pathways (p adj  < 0.1, NES −1.40) were also downregulated in OW/OB tumors. These associations were attenuated when S-phase correction was performed, supporting a link between metabolic activity and proliferation, as would be expected ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). Interestingly, although prior studies have shown that lipid transfer from adipocytes to melanocytes in the tumor microenvironment (TME) can fuel beta oxidation and OXPHOS, fatty acid metabolism was not significantly different in metastatic OW/OB vs NL BMI tumors ( Supplementary Table 7  and  8 ). Obesity is associated with increased production of insulin and growth factors, which may activate the PI3K pathway; however, PI3K pathway gene expression was similar between OW/OB and NL BMI patients, as was PI3K pathway protein expression in the TCGA cohort ( Supplementary Figure 2 ).( 27 , 28 ) Due to our previous finding that the influence of BMI on the efficacy of ICI and BRAF targeted therapy may differ by sex, we also performed GSEA controlling for sex as well as cohort and tumor tissue site ( Figure 2 ).( 10 ) The association of BMI with OXPHOS, myogenesis, adipogenesis, glycolysis, reactive oxygen species, and hypoxia pathways was observed in each analysis, and there was no evidence that the association between BMI and metabolic pathways differed by sex. ( Supplementary Figure 3 ).( 10 )   Figure 2:     Open in a new tab   Integrated gene set enrichment analysis by body mass index (BMI). This figure presents a dotplot of genes differentially up- or downregulated in OW/OB patients versus NL BMI patients. Red indicates upregulation in OW/OB verse NL. The far left column is all patients, and then, an analysis controlling for sex, cohort, and tissue site is shown in the 3 columns to the right. The presence of immune infiltrates and signatures of activated immune cells are associated with improved responses to both ICI and targeted therapy. However, we did not observe differences in immune pathways by BMI in Hallmark GSEA analysis ( Figure 2 ). We further interrogated the presence of immune cells and co-stimulatory/co-inhibitory molecules by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in the MDA and Gide cohorts. We did not observe any differences in immune infiltrates (CD3, CD8, CD68, CD45RO, or FOXP3+ cells) by BMI (Supplementary Figure 3A–B). With the exception of higher TBET expression observed in the OW/OB patients (p adj =0.01) and higher ratio of TBET+/FOXP3+ cells (p adj =0.003), we did not observe any differences in co-stimulatory/co-inhibitory molecules in either of the full cohorts ( Supplementary Figure 4A – B ), nor in sex-stratified analyses ( Supplementary Figures 5A – B ).   Given the intriguing finding from our hallmark GSEA that OW/OB tumors had downregulation of metabolic pathways, e.g. OXPHOS and glycolysis, we further interrogated metabolic pathways by performing GSEA for 57 KEGG pathways involved in biosynthesis and metabolism ( Figure 3 ). OW/OB tumors were metabolically quiescent globally, with downregulation of multiple metabolic pathways without compensatory upregulation of alternative metabolic pathways except terpenoid and fatty acid biosynthesis. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) analysis of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) metabolites in available frozen TCGA melanoma specimens (n=36) identified significantly lower concentrations of citrate (logfold difference −1.31, p=0.012) and succinate (logfold difference −0.91, p=0.048) in OW/OB tumors ( Figure 3 ,  Supplementary Figure 6 ), suggesting a suppression of the tricarboxylic acid cycle.   Figure 3:     Open in a new tab   Gene expression of KEGG metabolism pathways and direct metabolic profiling of tumor samples by BMI.   A. Integrated gene set enrichment analysis comparing KEGG biosynthesis and metabolism pathways by body mass index (BMI) in patients with metastatic melanoma. Blue indicates downregulation in OW/OB verse NL BMI patients. The far left column is all patients, and then, an analysis controlling for sex, cohort, and tissue site is shown in the 3 columns to the right.   B. Comparison of the tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolites citrate and succinate as measured by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry between metastatic melanoma tumors from overweight/obese (OW/OB) patients by body mass index (BMI) verse normal (NL) BMI from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Lines represent mean +/− SEM; each dot represents a single tumor. To functionally assess OXPHOS and glycolysis, we performed Seahorse Extracellular Flux Assay on melanoma cells isolated from fresh patient tumor biopsies (n=45) ( Figure 4A ). Consistent with gene expression and LC/MS results, the oxygen consumption rate (OCR; surrogate for OXPHOS) was significantly lower in tumors from OW/OB versus NL (p=0.018,  Figure 4B ). Similar to the gene expression data, melanoma tumors from OW/OB tended to be more metabolically quiescent overall (47.8% below median for both OCR and ECAR among OW/OB tumors vs. 21.4%% of NL BMI, p=0.166) ( Figure 4B ). We also performed Seahorse analysis on 17 patient-derived melanoma cell lines, which had been kept at low passage, and observed lower basal ECAR (p=0.047) and OCR (p=0.035) in OW/OB verse NL BMI patient-derived melanoma cell lines [55.6% low ECAR & OCR in OW/OB vs. 12.5% among normal BMI, p=0.131 ( Figure 4C )]. The fact that the tumor metabolic phenotypes associated with host BMI were conserved in patient-derived cell lines indicates cancer cell autonomy of the phenotype, and further suggests potential reprogramming at the epigenetic level.   Figure 4:     Open in a new tab   Direct measurement of mitochondrial metabolism in tumor tissue specimens and patient-derived melanoma cell lines by BMI.   A. Overview of the process to measure mitochondrial metabolism by Seahorse Extracellular Flux Assay from either tumor tissue biopsy or patient-derived melanoma cell lines. OCR = oxygen consumption rate, ECAR = extracellular acidification rate.   B. The first figure shows OCR measurements and the second figure shows ECAR measurements by BMI in tumor tissue of patients with metastatic melanoma. The third figure in Panel B shows one dot per patient reflecting ECAR measurements on the X axis and OCR measurements on the Y axis. Lines represent mean +/− SEM; each dot represents a single tumor. Dashed lines represent the median value in the third figure.   C. The first figure in Panel C shows OCR measurements and the second figure shows ECAR measurements by BMI in patient-derived melanoma cell lines. The third figure in Panel shows one dot per unique cell line representing ECAR measurements on the X axis and OCR measurements on the Y axis. Lines represent mean +/− SEM; each dot represents a single tumor. Dashed lines represent the median value in the third figure Several studies have demonstrated that the gut microbiome influences outcomes with ICI.( 5 – 7 , 29 , 30 ) As the microbiome has a bidirectional relationship with host metabolism and energy balance, we examined the associations between BMI and fecal microbiome features in a cohort of 371 patients with metastatic melanoma.( 31 ) The overall structure (beta diversity, p adj =0.10), diversity (p adj =0.15), and taxonomy of the fecal microbiome was similar between OW/OB and NL BMI patients ( Figure 5A – C ) in the overall cohort as well as in sex-stratified analyses ( Supplementary Figure 7 – 8 ). There were also no differences by BMI in the abundance of taxa we have previously found to be associated with ICI response ( Figure 5D ).( 5 , 7 ) These findings suggest that differences in the gut microbiome are unlikely to explain the improved outcomes seen with ICI treatment in OW/OB patients with metastatic melanoma.   Figure 5:     Open in a new tab   Fecal microbiome diversity and composition by body mass index (BMI).   A. The composition plot depicts the microbiome samples at the class level in the taxonomy, where samples are ordered by BMI and sex in the MD Anderson melanoma microbiome cohort (n=371).   B. Beta-diversity analysis based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity represents microbiome samples with metastatic melanoma in terms of the two top principal components (explainin