>Material and methods   Ethics statement   All animal experiments were approved by the institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) and the care of the animals was in accordance with institutional guidelines (IACUC protocol #0804-RN02). Animal care and husbandry conformed to practices established by the Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC), The Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and the Animal Welfare Act. Animal care   The rhesus macaque colony detailed in this manuscript is housed and maintained at MDACC KCCMR in Bastrop, TX. The breeding colony of Indian-origin rhesus macaques ( Macaca mulatta ) at KCCMR is a closed breeding colony, which is specific pathogen free (SPF) for Macacine herpesvirus-1 (Herpes B), Simian retroviruses (SRV-1, SRV-2, SIV, and STLV-1), and  Mycobacterium tuberculosis  complex.Tissue specimens from the proximal colon (n = 20), the ileocecal junction (n = 16), cecocolic junction (n = 2), cecum (n = 2), and jejunum (n = 1), as well as blood samples of rhesus macaques, were collected opportunistically at necropsy following euthanasia for clinical reasons between 2008 and 2019. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) slides were prepared by veterinary pathology technicians and the diagnosis confirmed by veterinary (C.L.H.) and human pathologists (M.W.T) after necropsy procedure. Colony demographics   The rhesus macaque breeding colony, called the Rhesus Monkey Breeding Research Resource (RMBRR), was established as a SPF colony in 1989. Establishment of the colony began in 1974–1975 with 17 male and 74 female Indian-origin rhesus macaques. The colony has remained SPF since 1989 and has been closed since its founding. Mating schema is harem breeding with one male and generally 3 to 12 females in a social breeding group. Kinship coefficients of all males and females are screened prior to assembling breeding groups to minimize inbreeding. Current practice is to avoid mating between animals with kinship coefficients >0.007. For reference, two 2 nd  cousins have a kinship coefficient of 0.0156, and two 3 rd  cousins have 0.00391. Environmental conditions, including diet and behavioral enrichment are comparable across all animals in the colony and have not changed significantly over time.   The first case of CRC in the RMBRR was diagnosed 1988 in one of the founding males. The exact age of this animal is not known but estimated to be >15 years. The allele frequency of the  MLH1  mutation within the RMBRR is currently approximately 5%.  MLH1  carriers have not been segregate in the population. Cumulative prevalence of CRC in the RMBRR in the period 2003–2019 is: 0.11% for ages 8–12 years; 1.68% for 13–17 years; 5.22% for 18–22 years, and 10.17% for 23–27 years. Rhesus  MLH1  carriers with CRC reported in this paper demonstrate inheritance patterns consistent with autosomal dominance with incomplete penetrance ( S3 Fig ). Nucleic acid extraction   Macro-dissection was performed to decrease the admixture of adjacent normal tissue and to enrich the percentage of tumor material for subsequent DNA and RNA extraction. De-paraffinization of FFPE tumor and adjacent normal specimens was performed using QIAGEN de-paraffinization solution (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA). DNA and RNA from 39 tumor and adjacent normal samples were extracted using the AllPrep DNA/RNA FFPE Kit (QIAGEN) following the manufacturer’s protocol. In the case of the unavailability of FFPE samples, genomic DNA and RNA were extracted from fresh frozen tumor (n = 2) and normal (n = 3) samples using the ZR-Duet DNA/RNA MiniPrep extraction kit (ZYMO Research, Irvine, CA). Quantification was performed using a NanoDrop One spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and Qubit Fluorometer 2.0 (Qubit, San Francisco, CA) using dsDNA and RNA assay kits. RNA integrity was analyzed using the Tape Station RNA assay kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Extracted DNA and RNA were kept at –20 and –80°C. Panel design for MSI testing   Commonly used human MSI markers (BAT25, BAT26, BAT40, D10S197, D18S58, D2S123, D17S250, D5S346, β-catenin, and TGFβRII) were used as a reference to design a panel of rhesus MSI markers [ 23 , 24 ]. In brief, genomic positions of human MSI markers in the rhesus macaque genome (rheMac8) were identified using the batch coordinate conversion tool (liftOver) in the UCSC genome browser [ 25 ]. Repeat patterns were compared to human MSI markers ( S1 Table ). Orthologous microsatellite regions corresponding to human MSI markers D2S123, D17S250, and D5S346 were not specific to assess MSI in the rhesus genome. Therefore, they were excluded from the final MSI rhesus panel. Primer sequences to target identified microsatellite regions in rhesus were designed using the NCBI Primer Blast tool (Accession ID# GCF_000772875.2) [ 26 ]. The primer efficiency was evaluated using the UCSC Genome Browser In-Silico PCR tool [ 25 ] with rheMac8 as a reference control. The Baylor College of Medicine genome database was used to calculate the probability of encountering SNPs within the primer sequences. Primers sequences with allele frequency greater than 0.05% were redesigned ( S2 Table ). PCR-based MSI testing in rhesus CRC   Multiplex PCRs were designed with at least 25 bp size differences among PCR amplicons to afford clear distinction and identification on electropherograms from the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. All markers were amplified in 25 μL PCR reactions using 12.5 μL of AmpliTaq Gold 360 PCR master mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), corresponding primer sets, and 10 ng of FFPE DNA. Multiplex PCRs were performed in a Veriti 96 Well Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) under the following cycling conditions: initial denaturation at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 35 cycles at 95°C for 30 sec, 55°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 30 sec. A final extension at 70°C for 30 min was implemented to aid non-template adenine addition. Multiplex PCR products were resolved on a 5% ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel. Multiplex PCRs were analyzed via Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer DNA 1000 kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Electropherograms of adjacent normal and tumor tissue samples were compared to assess the status for each of the MSI markers. Following NCI MSI testing consensus guidelines, MSI status was assigned by counting the number of unstable MSI markers and samples were assigned to either: MSS (stable markers), MSI-L (1 unstable marker, ≤ 30%), or MSI-H (2 or more unstable markers, ≥ 30%) [ 14 ]. MSI testing via fragment analysis for validation of the RheBAT26 and RheD18S58 markers   Fragment analysis (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) was performed to validate MSI results from the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer for RheBAT26 and RheD18S58 MSI markers. In brief, the 5’ end of the forward primer sequences for RheBAT26 and RheD18S58 MSI markers was labeled with a 6-FAM fluorescent dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). A multiplex PCR was designed to amplify RheBAT26 and RheD18S58 MSI markers with labeled primer sequences. PCR master mix and conditions were adopted from well-established PCR experiments. The fragment analysis method was performed by the Advanced Technology Genomics Core at MDACC. Sanger sequencing for discovery of germline MLH1 and somatic BRAF mutations   Primer sequences were designed to target  de novo  stop codon  MLH1  and  BRAF  mutations following previously described procedures (see panel design section,  S2 Table ). PCRs were performed using the Veriti 96 Well Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) under the following cycling conditions: initial denaturation at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 35 cycles at 95°C for 30 sec, 55°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 30 sec, with a final extension at 72°C for 7 min. Purification of PCR products was performed with an in-house ExoSAP solution [50 μL of Exonuclease I (20,000 units/mL, NEB M0568, Ipswich, MA); 40 μL of Antarctic Phosphatase (5,000 units/ml); 16 μL of Antarctic Phosphatase buffer (NEB M0289S, Ipswich, MA); 144 μL of nuclease-free H 2 O]. PCR conditions for purification of PCR products were incubation at 37°C for 15 min and at 80°C for 15 min. Quality control of PCR products and purified PCR products was performed running 1% Agarose gel prepared with 25 ml of 1X TBE buffer and 1.2 μL of EtBr. Then, gel-purified PCR products were sequenced by the MDACC sequencing core (ATGC) via the Sanger Sequencing method. Analysis of Sanger sequencing data was performed using DNASTAR lasergene software. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)   Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 was performed in FFPE tissue sections. Tissue sections were cut at 4 μm and submitted to the MDACC Research Histology, Pathology, and Imaging Core (RHPI) in Smithville, TX. The following Agilent Dako IHC antibodies were used according to manufacturer’s recommendations: IR079, Monoclonal Mouse Anti-human Mutl Protein Homolog 1, clone ES05 for MLH1; IR085, Monoclonal Mouse Anti-human Muts Protein Homolog 2, clone FE11 for MSH2; IR086 Monoclonal Rabbit Anti-human Muts Protein Homolog 6, clone EP49 for MSH6; IR087, Monoclonal Rabbit Anti-Human Posteiotic Segregation Increase 2, clone EPS1 for PMS2 [ 10 ]. Total RNA sequencing   Truseq stranded total RNA library preparation kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA) was used to prepare libraries of 19 tumors and 16 matched normal RNA samples, which were extracted from FFPE and frozen tissue samples. Prepared libraries were sequenced for 76nt paired-end sequencing on HiSeq4000 and NovaSeq6000 sequencers (Illumina, San Diego, CA) ( S4 Table ). Assessment of DNA methylation testing of  MLH1     DNA methylation analysis of the  MLH1  gene was performed on DNA from frozen tissue samples of 7 tumors and 3 normal tissue (duodenum and blood) samples using a targeted NGS assay (EpigenDx, Hopkinton, MA) ( S4 Table ). In brief, the bisulfite-treated DNA samples were used as a template for PCR to amplify a short amplicon of 300–500 bp using a set of primers that cover the  MLH1  genomic sequence at -4 kb to + 1kb from the transcriptional start site (TSS). Later, methylation libraries were constructed for methylation analysis on the Ion Torrent instrument at EpigenDx. DNA methylation assessment via reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS)   DNA libraries of RRBS were constructed from FFPE tissue samples of 14 tumors/adjacent normal tissue pairs using the Ovation RRBS Methyl-Seq System at The Epigenomics Profiling Core (EpiCore) of MDACC ( S4 Table ). In preparation, DNA was digested with a restriction enzyme and selected for size based on established protocols used in the EpiCore. Post-adapter ligation ensured enrichment for CpG islands, and DNA was bisulfite-treated, amplified with universal primers, and qualified libraries were then sequenced on Novaseq6000 sequencer at the UTMDACC ATGC. Bioinformatics analysis   The FASTQC toolkit was performed for quality control of FASTQ files generated from RNA sequencing [ 27 ]. The fastp tool was performed to trim adapters and low-quality reads [ 28 ]. Fasta and gtf files of the reference genome (Mmul_8.0.1) were downloaded from the Ensembl genome browser [ 29 ]. The reference genome was indexed using the STAR RNA sequencing aligner. Cleaned reads of total RNA sequencing were aligned to the reference genome using the STAR RNA sequencing aligner. Gene level estimated read counts were calculated by STAR RNA sequencing aligner and were saved in reads per gene tabular files [ 30 ]. This pipeline was implemented on the high-performance computing (HPC) cluster of MDACC. As performed for total RNA sequencing, RRBS FASTQ files were quality controlled using the FASTQC toolkit [ 27 ]. TrimGalore was performed to trim adapters and low-quality reads. Diversity trimming and filtering were completed with NuGEN’s diversity trimming scripts. Processed fastq files were aligned to the reference genome (Mmul_10) with bismark bisulfite mapper. The methylation information was extracted with bismark methylation extractor script.   Count data per sample was generated by STAR RNA sequencing aligner and combined into one matrix for downstream analyses. Genes with less than a sum of 300 reads in all samples were excluded from the analysis. Estimated read counts were normalized with variance stabilizing transformation (VST) using the DESeq2 Bioconductor R package [ 23 , 31 – 33 ]. MSI-L and MSS CRC cases were combined based on previous human studies. 3D Principal component analysis (PCA) of RNA sequencing was performed using pca3d (version 0.10.2) package in R (version 4.0.0) The batch effect of RNA seq data was removed using limma:removebatcheffect package in R (version 4.0.0) [ 34 ]. Significant differentially expressed genes between MSI-H and MSS/MSI-L rhesus CRC were calculated using Benjamini-Hochberg (BH)-adjusted  P- value≤ 0.05 and log2 fold change ≥-1 and log2 fold change ≤1. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was performed via Pearson’s correlation. Comparisons of MMR gene counts between tumor and adjacent normal colorectal mucosa were performed using the DESeq2 Bioconductor R package. Complex heatmap and an enhanced volcano plot were created in R studio (version 3.6.1) [ 35 ]. Rhesus Ensembl gene-IDs were converted to human Entrez ID for the CMS classification and GSEA. CMS classification of tumor samples was predicted using the random forest (RF) predictor in CMSclassifier R package (version 3.6.1) [ 15 ,  21 ]. CMS classification was assigned to the subtype with the highest posterior probability. GSEA was performed with 1,000 permutations using CRC pathways with the fgsea R package [ 15 , 36 ]. CRC pathways included signatures of interest in CRC, the ESTIMATE algorithm that assesses immune and stromal cell admixture in tumor samples, canonical pathways, immune signatures, and metabolic pathways [ 16 , 36 ].   Somatic and germline variant analyses of rhesus CRC samples were performed following GATK best practices. Filtered variants by the Mutect2 tool of GATK were annotated with Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) [ 37 ]. Variants with less than 10 reads were excluded. Mutation rates were calculated by dividing the number of non-synonymous somatic mutations in coding regions by the number of callable bases. Callable bases are calculated with samtools using tumor bam files [ 38 ]. Tumor purity of samples were calculated using ISOpureR (version 1.1.3) package using tumor and normal gene expression data [ 39 ].   Species comparison using TCGA datasets utilized raw RNA-Seq counts of MSI-H and MSS colorectal tumor samples and corresponding normal tissue samples (the 2016-01-28 analyses) of the TCGA project COADREAD and MSI status information was downloaded via FirebrowseR (version 1.1.35) package [ 40 , 41 ]. Then the raw data was filtered (min.count = 10, min.total.count = 15, large.n = 10, min.prop = 0.7) and normalized (TMM method) by package edgeR (version 3.32.1) [ 42 ]. Genes showing statistically significant (BH-adjusted p-value < 0.05) changes in the expression level by at least two-fold (log2FC = 1) between MSI-H and MSS samples were identified for the following analysis. The rhesus homologs were found by the Ensembl genome database via the biomaRt package (version 2.46.3) [ 29 , 43 , 44 ]. Mean CPM (counts per million) of each in COADREAD MSI-H tumor tissues, COADREAD MSS tumor tissues, COADREAD normal tissues, rhesus LS tumor tissues, and rhesus LS normal tissues were used to calculate the Pearson’s correlation of each group. CPM of each gene was used to perform the unsupervised hierarchical clustering, and to generate the dendrogram tree and heat map for individual samples.   For DNA methylation analysis of RRBS, 3D PCA was performed using pca3d package in R (version 4.0.0) and sample clustering was performed using cytosine report files pvclust package in R (version 4.0.0 with 10,000 bootstraps [ 45 ]. The minimum coverage depth was 10 reads. DMR were calculated using bismark coverage report files with edgeR Bioconductor R package [ 28 ]. Significant DMRs at CpG loci were displayed at an FDR of 5%.   Correlation analysis between methylation and expression data was performed using top 500 significant up- and down-regulated genes that were also methylated from the comparison between rhesus tumor and normal adjacent colorectal mucosa.  P- values were calculated using one-tailed t-test. Supporting information     S1 Fig. Comparison of mean age at death of rhesus presenting with CRC. Sporadic animals do not carry a germline mutation in  MLH1 . Mean age of CRC at death among rhesus Lynch was younger (17.75 years) compared to sporadic rhesus (19.48 years). Welch’s t-test,  P -value = 0.2169.   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (769.5KB, eps)      S2 Fig.  MLH1  germline mutation detected in rhesus LS. Each colored line represents a different type of nucleotide. Brown arrowhead points to the germline mutation detected in normal tissue of rhesus RM09. Non-syndromic animal DNA carries a cytosine (C) nucleotide in c.1029 position of  MLH1 . However, rhesus RM09 carries a mutation in one allele involving the substitution of C>G in c.1029, thus creating a nonsense mutation that leads to a stop codon (TAG).   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (1.1MB, eps)      S3 Fig. Pedigree of rhesus cases characterized in this manuscript. Red marks indicate CRC. Blue mark indicates salivary tumor. Plus signs indicate the presence of the  MLH1  germline mutation in heterozygous state. Generations are indicated using roman numerals on the right margin. Animal U was genotyped and found to be wild type for the  MLH1  germline mutation (c.1029 C>G). All animals are deceased, except animal U.   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (1.6MB, eps)      S4 Fig. Immunohistochemical staining for MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 from rhesus CRC tissue samples. Left column indicates IHC results of the colonic epithelium of unaffected rhesus. Middle column shows the IHC results of RM02 that displayed a MSS phenotype retaining the expression of all MMR proteins. Right column displays the results of IHC in RM32 consistent with MSI-H phenotype with loss of expression of MLH1 and PMS2. Note that the internal positive control in case RM32 is the positive expression of the MMR proteins in the lymphocytes present in the stroma. Magnification is 100X.   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (6.1MB, eps)      S5 Fig. Microsatellite instability analysis. (A)  Examples of microsatellite loci analyzed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Blue and red lines represent tumor tissue and normal tissue, respectively. Electropherograms A1, A2, and A3 are examples of the most frequent microsatellite markers displaying instability in the tumor samples. Arrowheads indicate instability in MSI markers. Electropherograms A4, A5, and A6 are examples of the most common microsatellite markers displaying stability in tumor samples;  (B)  Examples of microsatellite loci analyzed using fragment analyzer. B1 shows tumor tissue of case RM13, displays instability in markers RheBAT26 and RheD18S58. Arrowheads indicate unstable markers in tumor tissue. B2 displays normal tissue of case RM13 and serves as a control/reference to establish calls in microsatellite markers in matched tumor tissue of the same case. Overall, fragment analysis validates the results obtained from Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer calls in markers RheBAT26 and RheD18S58.   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (2.3MB, eps)      S6 Fig. Cluster analysis of RRBS DNA methylation analysis using “correlation” distance with”ward.D” clustering method with 10000 bootstrap. Gray values represent the rank of the cluster and the highest rank is 26 for this cluster. Red values indicate approximately unbiased (au)  P -value and green values show bootstrap probability (bp). The minimum au value is 96, which proves that the clusters are valid ( P -value<0.05).   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (1.2MB, eps)      S7 Fig. DNA methylation regulates gene expression in rhesus CRC. (A)  Significant differentially methylated regions (DMRs) at FDR of 5% observed in rhesus tumors compared to adjacent normal colorectal mucosa.  TOP1 ,  PCGF3  and  FAM76B  were among the hyper-methylated genes, and  GAS8 ,  ALKBH5  and  MME  were among the hypo-methylated genes in rhesus CRC.  (B)  Correlation analysis between DNA methylation and gene expression data. We observed a negative correlation between DNA methylation and gene expression that had a trend towards statistical significance ( P -value = 0.1336). For this analysis, we selected the top 500 differentially methylated genes.   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (2.1MB, eps)      S8 Fig. DNA methylation in the promoter region of  MLH1  in rhesus CRC. The location of CpG islands are shown from the TSS of  MLH1 . A total of thirteen CpG regions are significantly methylated in sporadic MSI-H rhesus CRC samples (* P -value<0.05 Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test). The majority of methylated CpG regions are located in exon 1 of  MLH1  of rhesus tumor. There is no significant differences in methylation between tumor and normal samples.   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (2.5MB, eps)      S9 Fig. Rhesus tumor purity of specimens assessed by RNA sequencing. The mean of rhesus tumor purity is 65.9% measured in silico using RNA sequencing data.   (EPS)       Click here for additional data file.  (1.5MB, eps)      S10 Fig. Expression data of rhesus CRC. (A)  3D PCA of rhesus CRC expression profiles without batch effect correction.  (B)  Differentially expressed genes between rhesus colorectal normal and tumor samples. Gene expression is displayed in volcano plots with log2(FoldChange) on the X-axis and -log10(BH-adjusted  P -value) on the Y-axis. The horizontal dash line represents BH-adjusted  P -value = 0.05. The left and right vertical lines represent log2(Fold-Change) = ±1. Significant genes are labeled as upregulated (red) and down-regulated (blue) genes. Some significant genes are annotated;  (C)  Expression of MMR genes in rhesus CRC. Normalized gene counts of whole transcriptome sequencing with variance stabilizing transformation (VST) are on the Y-axis to display g