>Materials and methods   Drugs and antibodies   XYS was obtained from the Affiliated Hospital of Gansu University of Chinese Medicine, and the Chinese herbal medicine prescription granules it contains were acquired from Guangdong Yifang Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. LPS (≥ 500000 EU/mg, # BS904-10 mg) was from Biosharp (Beijing, China). Glycyrrhizic acid (purity = 99.84%, CAS #: 1405-86-3) was procured from MedChemExpress (Shanghai, China) and dissolved in DMSO. Toluidine blue (CAS #: 6586-04-5) was purchased from Macklin (Macklin, China). The primary antibodies specific for Iba1 (# 10904-1-AP), β-actin (# 66009-1-lg), cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox2, # 27308-1-AP), IL-1β (# 26048-1-AP), IL6 (# 26404-1-AP) and TNF-α (# 29652-1-AP) were purchased from Proteintech (Wuhan, China). JNK (# AF6318) and p-JNK (Thr183 + Tyr185, # AF3318) were purchased from Affinity Biosciences (Jiangsu, China). Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled goat anti-rabbit/mouse (# A21020/A21010) IgG was used as secondary antibody and purchased from Abbkine (Wuhan, China). Collect the main phytochemicals of XYS and their potential targets   This study focuses on the 16 blood compounds of XYS in plasma identified through the UPLC-MS/MS method 29 , 30 . Each compound’s SMILES was downloaded from the PubChem database. The potential targets of XYS phytochemicals were collected from the HERB database ( http://herb.ac.cn/ ) 69  and the Swisstargetprediction server ( http://swisstargetprediction.ch/ ) 70 . It should be noted that XYS phytochemicals are preferentially retrieved from the HERB database, while those phytochemicals such as atractylenolide  I , atractylenolide  II , atractylenolide  III  and Dl-3-n-butylphthalide that cannot be retrieved from the HERB database are predicted through the Swisstargetprediction server. We further utilized WebCSEA ( https://bioinfo.uth.edu/webcsea/ ) 71  to classify the potential targets of XYS by organ systems and cell types. Evaluate the Pharmacological and toxicological parameters of the phytochemicals in XYS   Compounds that comply with Lipinski rule exhibit better oral bioavailability, those that adhere to Pfizer rule are generally non-toxic, and compounds conforming to GSK rule may possess more favorable ADMET profile. The aforementioned three rules of XYS phytochemicals were evaluated using the ADMETlab 3.0 platform ( https://admetlab3.scbdd.com/ ) 31 . We calculated the toxicological parameters of XYS phytochemicals using the Protox II webserver ( https://tox-new.charite.de/protox_II/ ) 72 . According to the toxicity rules 11 , 32 , if the acute toxicity is greater than grade 3 and the number of positive toxicity endpoints is fewer than 3, it indicates non-toxicity. GSEA   Human brain tissue samples are extremely scarce and are generally obtained from post-mortem autopsy samples and invasive biopsy samples. Compared to brain tissue samples, the collection of peripheral blood is a minimally invasive procedure with no significant health risks to the patient. The  GSE98793  dataset 73 , comprising whole blood samples from 64 healthy controls and 128 samples from individuals with MDD, was obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Depression is not merely a central nervous system disorder, but a systemic disease characterized by the dysregulation of the central-peripheral system interaction. The changes in the peripheral blood transcriptome are not isolated events, but rather exhibit clear molecular associations with central pathological mechanisms. GSEA was performed to identify MDD-related gene enrichment using the ClusterProfiler R package (version 3.12.0), with a significance threshold set at  p  < 0.05. For the GSEA results, both the NES and  p  value were reported. Analysis of gene expression profiles in the mouse brain following intracerebral LPS challenge   The gene expression dataset  GSE122815 74  (specie:  Mus musculus ) was downloaded from the GEO database for analysis. These data were obtained from the  GPL11180  platform (Affymetrix HT MG-430 PM Array Plate), which includes hemisphere brain samples after 4 days of intrastriatal injection of LPS or PBS ( n  = 3, three biological replicate samples were combined to form a single sample). DEGs were identified using the BioConductor Limma package with cut-offs of adjusted  p -value < 0.05 and fold change > 2. We further analyzed the brain cell localization of DEGs using the “Single Cell Expression” module of the AlzData database ( http://www.alzdata.org/ ) 34 , including neurons, astrocytes, microglia, endothelial cells, and oligodendrocytes. We have paid special attention to the DEGs specifically localized in astrocytes and microglia. We further utilized Venny 2.1 ( https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html ) to identify the common genes between XYS and DEGs. GO enrichment analysis for biological process (BP)   GO enrichment analysis for BP was obtained using the ClusterProfiler R package 75 , with a corrected  p  < 0.05 as the threshold for significance. The ratio of the number of genes to the total number of genes annotated in this term is referred to as the rich factor. We have primarily focused on the BPs related to neuroinflammation or apoptotic signaling pathway. Bubble plot presentation of BP enrichment analysis was generated using a web-based tool ( www.bioinformatics.com.cn ). Construction of PPI network and screening of core targets   The PPI networks of XYS targets were built using STRING version 12.0 ( https://cn.string-db.org/ ) with a confidence score threshold of 0.4, and visualized using Cytoscape v3.10.3. The analysis was limited to the organism  Homo sapiens . The PPI network comprises nodes, which represent a target protein, and edges, which represent protein-protein interactions. The thickness of the edges represents the combined score. Degree represents the number of other nodes directly connected to a node. A higher degree value indicates greater significance of the node within the network. The Cytoscape plugin, Network Analysis plugin, was employed to determine the degree values 22 . In this study, the top 20 target proteins were selected and identified as core targets based on their degree rankings. We further utilized Venny 2.1 to identify the core targets involved in multiple neuroinflammatory BPs. Molecular Docking simulations and MD simulations   The molecular docking procedure LeDock ( http://www.lephar.com/software.htm ) 76  was used for the automated molecular docking simulations. Briefly, the three-dimensional structures of target proteins were downloaded from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB database,  http://www.rcsb.org/ ) 77 , while the three-dimensional SDF format files of XYS phytochemicals were retrieved from the PubChem database. The LePro tool was utilized to process receptor files, including hydrogenation and the acquisition of the binding pocket. The docking score (in kcal/mol) was calculated using the default scoring function. The interaction residues and hydrogen bond lengths between the ligand and receptor were visualized using LigPlot ( https://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/LigPlus/ ) 78 . Generally speaking, docking scores < −7 kcal/mol have strong binding affinity, and − 4 < docking scores ≤ −7 kcal/mol have moderate interactions 79 , 80 . Ultimately, the optimal docking conformation, characterized by the lowest docking score, was selected for subsequent MD simulation analysis. The MD simulations were carried out with the GROMACS 2024.1 package. The ligand parameters were obtained from the General Amber Force Field (GAFF2), and the charges were derived using the AM1-BCC method. AMBER ff14sb_OL15 protein force field together with the TIP3P water model was used. The production MD simulations were run at 300 K for 100 ns with a time step of 2 fs under constant volume and temperature. The stability of the complex structure was evaluated using the RMSD. Animals and treatments   The 8-week-old male C57/BL/6J mice (22–24 g, SPF grade, SCXK(Su)2020-0009,  n  = 43) were purchased from Huachuang Sino Pharmaceutical Technology Company (Jiangsu, China), and the animal certification number was B202407030457. All mice were housed and maintained in the Medicine Animal Center of University of South China (the use license number is SYXK(Xiang)2020-0002), and the experimental procedures were approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of University of South China (No. 2023-36).   The XYS, which is derived from the Chinese herbal medicine prescription granules, were freshly dissolved in boiling water and stirred thoroughly before application. The recommended dosage of XYS for adult human in clinical applications is 147.57 mg/kg/day. Based on the mouse equivalent dose being 9.1 times that of humans 81 , 82 , the gavage dose of XYS is 1342.9 mg/kg/day. Mice were first randomly divided into two groups, with the XYS group ( n  = 23, 1342.9 mg/kg/day) receiving XYS via oral gavage and the CON group ( n  = 20) receiving an equivalent volume of water, for a duration of two weeks. The LPS-induced mouse model is a typical inflammatory animal model of depression 53 . During the last 3 days of the gavage treatment, LPS (0.83 mg/kg/day) 35 , 36 , 54  or an equivalent volume of normal saline was intraperitoneally injected while continuing the gavage. Starting from day 12, the mice were divided into four groups: CON group ( n  = 10), XYS group ( n  = 12), LPS group ( n  = 10), and XYS + LPS group ( n  = 11). Twenty-four hours after the last LPS injection, all mice underwent depression-related behavioral tests. Detailed experimental procedures provided in Fig.  5 A. Mice were sacrificed to collect brain and liver samples for further analysis. Isoflurane was used for mouse anesthesia, and Pentobarbital was used for mouse euthanasia. Behavioral tests   OFT   All mice were individually tested in an open-field apparatus consisting of a white square base (45 × 45 cm) with white walls (45 cm in height). A single mouse was carefully placed in the center of the chamber, and all spontaneous activities were recorded for 5 min using a video-computerized tracking system. Immediately following each experiment, the boxes were sanitized with 75% alcohol. The total distance traveled in the OFT was used as an index of locomotor activity and depression/anxiety-like behavior. EPM   The EPM experiment was conducted using a plus-maze apparatus that comprised two open arms, two closed arms, and a central platform. Both the open and closed arms measured 50 × 10 cm, with the closed arms featuring baffles on either side. Mice were placed individually in the central area, 50 cm above the ground, and their movements were recorded for 5 min. Following each experiment, the enclosures were promptly cleaned using 75% alcohol. Locomotion was monitored and tracked through an automated system. The durations spent in the closed arms, open arms, and central platform were documented.   MBT   We assessed anxiety-related behaviors in mice through MBT. To conduct the test, prepare a cage with dimensions of 40 × 25 × 20 cm, which should be lined with 5 cm of corn cob bedding. Arrange 20 glass marbles, each with a diameter of 2.5 cm, in a “4 × 5” configuration within the cage. Introduce a single mouse into the cage and record the number of marbles buried by the mouse within a 10 min observation period. A marble is identified buried when at least two-thirds of its surface is covered by the corn cob bedding. FST   We used the immobility time in the FST to assess the despair behavior of the animals. The mice were placed individually in a Plexiglas cylinder (50 cm in height × 30 cm in diameter) filled with 30 cm water (25 °C). Immobility was defined as no movement at all or only minor movements necessary to keep the nose above the water versus mobility, which was defined by swimming and struggling behaviors. Each test session lasted for 6 min, with the final 4 min scored for immobility. Sucrose preference test (SPT)   As a classic behavioral experiment for assessing anhedonia, SPT comprises two phases: training and testing. During the training phase, without altering the normal diet of the mice, an additional 1.5% sucrose solution was provided at irregular intervals 2–3 days before the SPT. In the testing phase, the mice were deprived of water and food for 24 h, and then both sugar water and normal drinking water were offered, but no food was provided. The consumption of sugar water over 24 h was recorded. Sucrose preference was calculated using the following formula: sucrose preference (%) = sucrose consumption/(water consumption + sucrose consumption) × 100%. Measurement of liver function   Serum was obtained from the blood samples by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 15 min and stored at 80 °C. Serum AST (# E-BC-K236-M) and ALT (# E-BC-K235-M) levels were tested by using corresponding assay kits from Elabscience Biotech (Wuhan, China). The detection was performed strictly according to the kit instructions. HE staining   We employed HE staining to assess histopathological damage in liver tissues. The liver tissues from both the control group and the XYS group were excised post-surgery and subsequently rinsed with pre-cooled PBS. Following fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent, China) for 24 h, routine paraffin embedding and section were performed. Hematoxylin and Eosin Staining Kit (Biosharp, China) was utilized for HE staining. All morphological images in this study were taken using an Olympus optical microscope (Olympus BX60, Tokyo, Japan). IHC staining and Nissl staining   Microglia in the PFC were visualized using Iba1 (# 10904-1-AP, 1:200) IHC staining. The IHC staining procedure was conducted in accordance with our previous studies 83 , 84 . The IHC universal type two-step detection kit (PV-9000) and diaminobenzidine (DAB) coloration (ZLI-9018) were obtained from Zhongshan Jinqiao (Beijing, China). Nissl staining of a 30 μm coronal section with toluidine blue solution (0.1% toluidine blue in 0.1% sodium carbonate, pH = 11.1) was used. All images were captured by an Olympus optical microscope (Olympus BX60, Tokyo, Japan). Microglia in a healthy brain are in a relatively round body, longer, thinner and resting state (resting cells). In the states initially activated after brain injury, they rapidly proliferate, cell bodies enlarge and processes retract or become thicker. Therefore, this study selected the perimeter and area of the cell bodies to reflect the activation of microglia 85 . The analysis of the perimeter and area of microglial cell bodies, along with the quantification of Nissl-stained positive neurons in the PFC, was conducted using ImageJ software ( https://imagej.net/ ). Western blotting   The protein concentrations of the PFC tissues or cell samples were measured using a bicinchoninic acid kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). Western blotting was conducted as previously described 83 , 84 . The PVDF membranes (0.45 μm) were incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. Signals were visualized with an enhanced chemiluminescence imaging system (SCG-W2000, Servicebio, Wuhan, China). ImageJ software was used to analyze the results of the Western blotting. Cell culture and CCK8 assay   The immortalized mouse BV2 microglial cell line, exhibiting morphological and molecular characteristics similar to primary microglial, was purchased from the Boster Biological Technology (product number: XBS0421-0017, Wuhan, China). Cells were cultured in α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin at 37 ℃ a humidified incubator under a 95%/5% (v/v) mixture of air and CO 2 . We established an in vitro cell model of neuroinflammation by treating BV2 cells with LPS (1 µg/ml) for 24 h 42 , 43 .   Cell viability was assessed indirectly using a CCK-8 assay. BV2 cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a suitable density. GA is a phytochemical found in  Radix Glycyrrhizae Praeparata , classified by the FDA as Generally Recognized As Safe as a food additive. Various concentrations of GA (0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 µM) were applied to treat cells for 24 h. After 24 h exposure, the medium was replaced with 100 µL of fresh medium containing 10% CCK-8 reagent (# C0038, Beyotime, Shanghai, China) for 60 min at 37 °C. Optical densities of CCK8 were measured by a Multiskan FC microplate reader (Thermo Scientific, USA) at 450 nm. Statistical analysis   All data were expressed as the means ± standard error of mean (SEM). The differences between groups were assessed using one-way ANOVA analysis and Tukey’s multiple comparison using SPSS 19.0 statistical software (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Data visualization was performed using Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software, USA). The significance level was defined as  p  < 0.05. Supplementary Information   Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.     Supplementary Material 1  (177.9KB, pdf)      Supplementary Material 2  (302.2KB, pdf)      Supplementary Material 3  (523.8KB, pdf)    Abbreviations     5-HT   5-hydroxytryptamine   ADMET   Absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity   ALT   Alanine aminotransferase   AST   Aspartate aminotransferase   BPs   Biological processes   AI   Artificial Intelligence   CCK8   Cell counting kit-8   CRS   Chronic restraint stress   CUMS   Chronic unpredictable mild stress   CV   Central vein   DAB   Diaminobenzidine   DEGs   Differentially expressed genes   EPM   Elevated plus maze   FST   Forced swimming test   GA   Glycyrrhizic acid   GEO   Gene Expression Omnibus   GO   Gene Ontology   GSEA   Gene set enrichment analysis   HE   Hematoxylin and Eosin   HRP   Horseradish peroxidase   IHC   Immunohistochemical   LPS   Lipopolysaccharide   MBT   Marble burying test   MD   Molecular dynamics   MDD   Major depressive disorder   NE   Norepinephrine   NES   Normalized enrichment score   OFT   Open field test   PFC   Prefrontal cortex   PPI   Protein-protein interaction   RMSD   Root mean square deviation   SEM   Standard error of mean   SNRIs   Serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors   SPT   Sucrose preference test   SSRIs   Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors   TCM   Traditional Chinese medicine   XYS   Xiaoyao San   Author contributions   Conceptualization, P.Z. and Y.-Z.Y.; investigation, X.-Y.L., P.Z. and Y.-Z.Y.; methodology, X.-Y.L., W.-Y.H., and S.-J.T.; supervision, A.-J.J. and S.-J.T.; visualization, M.-F.D., P.Z., and Y.-Y.F.; writing—original draft, P.Z.; writing—review and editing, S.-J.T., C.-H.L. and P.Z. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. Funding   This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82301506), the Science and Technology Innovation Project for College Students (202510555083), Provincial Natural Science Foundation of Hunan (Grant No. 2023JJ40562), and Open Fund Project of Hubei Key Laboratory for Kidney Disease Pathogenesis and Intervention (2023SB101). Data availability   The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors. Declarations   Competing interests   The authors declare no competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate   The study was approved by the Animal Ethical Committee of the University of South China (No. 2023-36). Approval for animal experiments   All animal research protocols were conducted in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the US National Institutes of Health.   This study adheres to internationally accepted standards for animal research, following the 3Rs principle. The ARRIVE guidelines were employed for reporting experiments involving live animals, promoting ethical research practices. Footnotes       Publisher’s note   Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.     These authors contributed equally to this work: Xin-Yi Liu and Yi-Zhi Yan.   Contributor Information   Si-Jie Tan, Email: sjtan@usc.edu.cn.   Peng Zeng, Email: zengp@usc.edu.cn. References       1. Collins, N. Groundbreaking studies expand genetic associations with depression and bipolar disorder.  JAMA 333