>Materials and methods   Clinical samples   Two hundred and one human primary HCC tissue specimens were collected with informed consent from the Guangxi Cancer Institute (Nanning, China) and the Qidong Liver Cancer Institute (Qidong, China) between 2001 and 2009. Informed consent was obtained from all patients. All patients received neither chemotherapy nor radiotherapy prior to surgery. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, with an approval number KY2021-192-B. Cell culture   Human HCC cells MHCC-97H were generously provided by Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Shanghai, China). HCC-LY10 cells were established using the human primary HCC tissues in our laboratory; Huh7 cells were obtained from the Riken Cell Bank (Tsukuba, Japan), while Hep3B and HEK 293T cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). Cells were cultured in DMEM (BasalMedia Technologies, Shanghai, China) containing 10% FBS (Gibco, New York, USA) and maintained at a temperature of 37 ℃ with a humidified atmosphere containing 5% carbon dioxide. All cell lines were authenticated using STR profiles. Plasmid constructs and lentivirus packaging   The human RIT1 coding sequence was amplified by PCR and cloned into the lentiviral expression vector pWPXL (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) and pcDNA3.1-Myc vector. Flag-SMC3 was purchased from Guangzhou Fulengen Co., Ltd (Guangzhou, China). The N-terminal and C-terminal truncations of RIT1were separately amplified and inserted into the pcDNA3.1-Myc vector for Co-IP assay at the XhoI and KpnI sites. Short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) targeting RIT1, SMC3, and negative control (NC) were obtained from Horizon Discovery (Cambridge, United Kingdom). siRNA oligonucleotides for ESCO1, PDS5A, and PDS5B were purchased from RiboBio (Guangzhou, China). Target sequences of the shRNA and siRNA are listed in Supplemental Table  S1 . Lentivirus packing and plasmid transfection were conducted following the instructions provided by PolyPlus Transfection (Ilkirch, France). Quantitative real-time PCR   Total RNA was extracted from cells using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, California, USA). RNA was then reverse-transcribed into cDNA using a PrimeScript RT-PCR kit (Takara, Japan). Quantitative real-time PCR analyses were conducted using SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Takara, Japan) on a 7500 PCR system according to the manufacturer’s protocol. GAPDH was utilized as an internal control. The primer sequences are listed in Supplemental Table  S2 . Western blot   The extraction of cell and tissue proteins was carried out using T-PER Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Protein quantification was performed by a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). Subsequently, the protein samples were separated by 10% and 8% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Following blocking with 5% skim milk, the PVDF membranes were incubated overnight at 4 ℃ with a primary antibody. On the following day, the membranes were incubated with a specific HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 2 h. Visualization of target protein bands was achieved through chemiluminescence detection methods. Details regarding the utilized antibodies can be found in Supplemental Table  S3 . Cell proliferation and colony formation assay   Cell proliferation was assessed using the CCK8 assay (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). The cells were seeded in 96-well plates at varying densities based on the growth characteristics of the cell lines. A fixed volume of CCK8 reagent (10 µL) and medium (90 µL) were added to each well at a predetermined time and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm. For colony formation assays, cells were seeded and cultured for approximately 14 days in six-well plates (ensuring most cell clumps achieved > 50 cells). Subsequently, the cells were then washed with PBS, fixed in neutral phosphate-buffered formalin for 30 min, and stained with crystal violet (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Each experiment was performed in triplicates. Live cell imaging   The progression of cell division was monitored using time-lapse video microscopy. Cells from different groups were seeded in 12-well plates and placed in an incubator equipped with a Nikon (Tokyo, Japan) Biostation Time-lapse system. The imaging field was carefully selected and the focal length adjusted to ensure accurate positioning of the photographs. Images were continuously captured at 30-min intervals for a duration of 10 h. Immunohistochemistry   Tissue microarrays (TMA) were prepared for immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. IHC was performed following previously described protocols [ 24 ]. Two independent pathologists, who were blinded to the patient’s specific medical features, evaluated the staining results. The IHC results were scored from 0 to 4 according to the percentage of positive cells and staining intensity. A score of 0-2 was considered low protein expression, while a score of 3-4 was considered high protein expression. The antibodies used are listed in Supplemental Table  S4 . Immunofluorescence   Cells were inoculated on Lab-Tek II chamber slides (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and treated with synchronization reagents to gather cells at different cell cycle phases. Subsequently, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at 25 °C and infiltrated with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 20 min. After blocking with Blocker casein in PBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for 30 min, the cells were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. The following day, species-specific secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor-546 or -488 were applied to the cells and incubated for 1 h at 25 °C. Cell nuclei were stained using DAPI. Immunofluorescence images were acquired using a confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). The specific antibodies used are listed in Supplemental Table  S4 . Co-immunoprecipitation assay   Cell proteins were harvested using RIPA lysis buffer (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Following protein quantification, IgG or specific antibodies were added into the protein lysate and incubated at 4 ℃ under gentle rotation for 16 h. Protein A/G-agarose beads (Abmart, Shanghai, China) were then introduced into the mixture and rotated for an additional 2 h. Subsequently, the beads were washed three times with RIPA lysis buffer and then boiled a protein-loading dye. Finally, the complexes were subjected to western blot analysis. Flow cytometry for cell apoptosis and cell cycle analysis   Human HCC cell lines with stable knockdown of RIT1 and SMC3 were used in this study. The cells were collected and fixed in 70% ethanol. The staining reagents consisted of propidium iodide at a concentration of 50 mg/mL, Triton X-100 at a concentration of 0.2%, and RNase A at a concentration of 100 µg/mL. The cell cycle was monitored using a BD LSRII flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), and the results were analyzed using ModFit software. For the apoptosis assay, cells were collected and stained with PE and 7-ADD (BD Biosciences, New York, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The percentage of PE (+) cells was measured, and the data were analyzed using the FlowJo software. Animal studies   The Huh7 cells (2 × 10 6 ), with a stable expression of pWPXL, RIT1, or RIT1 with shSMC3 were collected and subcutaneously inoculated into male BALB/c nude mice (n = 7, 6-8 week-old). After 20 days, the tumor-bearing mice were sacrificed using CO 2 . The tumors were excised and weighed. The tumor volume was calculated using the formula: volume = (length × width^ 2 )/2. All experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Renji Hospital. The Animal Care and Use Committee approved number is R52022-1025. Statistical analysis   The statistical analysis was conducted using R programming ( https://www.r-project.org/ ). The data were presented as the means ± standard deviation (SD). Student’s  t -test was employed for comparing two-group of data. Spearman correlation method was utilized to analyze the correlation between two molecules. Kaplan-Meier estimates were used for survival analysis. Statistical significance was defined as  P  < 0.05. Results   RIT1 regulates mitotic processes in HCC cells   To investigate the underlying mechanism by which RIT1 promotes HCC progression, we conducted GSEA using the TCGA LIHC database. Our findings revealed a strong correlation between high RIT1 expression in HCC tissues and cell growth and mitotic processes, including sister chromatid segregation, spindle assembly, and nuclear division (Fig.  1 A and Supplemental Table  S5 ). We established stably RIT1-overexpressed HCC cells and performed RNA-Seq analysis to identify differential gene expression between RIT1 overexpressed and control groups. Genes showing at least a 1.5-fold difference in expression were selected for further gene enrichment analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis demonstrated that RIT1 overexpression was associated with multiple GO terms related to cell growth and mitotic processes, such as mitotic cell cycle transition, mitotic nuclear division, spindle assembly, and sister chromatid segregation. In addition, KEGG pathway analysis along with hallmark analyses indicated that RIT1 was involved in various signaling pathways including MAPK signaling pathway, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, interferon alpha response, mTORC1 signaling, and hypoxia (Fig.  1 B), which is consistent with previous reports [ 15 ,  20 ]. The above analyses of TCGA and RNA-Seq results support that RIT1 expression levels are closely associated with mitotic processes in HCC.   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   RIT1 is closely associated with the mitotic processes in HCC.  A  Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of a TCGA LIHC cohort with 374 tissues stratified by the mean cut-off value of RIT1 expression.  B  GO, KEGG, and HALLMARK enrichment analysis based on differential genes detected by RNA-Seq in the RIT1 overexpressing and control group of HCC cells. The terms are ordered by -log10 FDR.  C  Comparison of the representative time-lapse images of dynamic division at different time points between RIT1 knockdown and control groups in MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells (upper section). The quantitation histogram showing the percentage of abnormal division cells (lower section). Data are presented as mean ± SD of three independent experiments. ***  P  < 0.001. The  P  values were calculated by unpaired Student’s  t -test in ( C ) To investigate the biological function of RIT1 in mitosis, we examined the expression of RIT1 protein in various HCC cell lines using western blot (Fig.  S1 A). MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells were selected for lentiviral transfection to establish stably RIT1-knockdown cell lines. The knockdown efficiency of the RIT1 protein was assessed using qPCR and western blot analysis (Fig.  S1 B). Subsequently, we performed live cell imaging and dynamically observed the cell division process. The results demonstrated that depletion of RIT1 led to cell division failure, with abnormal phenomena observed in both MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells including cell enlargement, cell vacuolation, binucleated cells, multinucleated cells, and cell death (Fig.  1 C). These results suggest a pivotal role for RIT1 in mitosis in HCC. Knockdown of RIT1 induces mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis in HCC cells   Rapid proliferation due to mitotic dysregulation is a significant feature of cancer, and precise cell cycle progression is essential for proper cell division and proliferation [ 25 ]. Given the involvement of RIT1 in mitotic processes and its promotion of HCC growth, we employed flow cytometry to investigate the effect of RIT1 on cell cycle progression. Cell cycle assays revealed an increased percentage of cells in the G2/M phase following RIT1 knockdown, indicating that RIT1 knockdown induced G2/M phase arrest (Fig.  S2 A). Precisely regulated mitosis ensures proper chromosome segregation, whereas abnormal mitosis can cause mitotic catastrophe, leading to cell death [ 26 ]. Subsequently, we examined whether silencing RIT1 affects spindle formation during mitosis in MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells. The immunofluorescence (IF) staining results showed that silencing RIT1 caused a significantly increased multipolar spindle cells (Fig.  2 A, B), which are hallmarks of mitotic catastrophe. To confirm the mitotic catastrophe caused by RIT1 interference, we further observed the morphological characteristics of cell nuclei. We found that RIT1 knockdown resulted in obvious multinucleated, heterogeneous nuclei in MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells (Fig.  2 C, D). Furthermore, according to the 7-ADD/propidium iodide staining analysis, RIT1 knockdown induced significant apoptosis in MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells (Fig.  2 E). These data suggest that knockdown of RIT1 causes cell cycle arrest, triggers mitotic catastrophe, and promotes apoptosis in HCC cells.   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Knockdown of RIT1 induces mitotic catastrophe and apoptosis in HCC cells.  A, B  Representative immunofluorescence staining images of α-tubulin (red) and DAPI (blue) show spindle morphology during mitosis in MHCC-97H (A) and HCC-LY10 cells (B) with RIT1 knockdown and control (left). The quantitation histogram showing the percentage of cells with multipolar spindle (right).  C, D  Representative immunofluorescence staining images of α-tubulin (red) and DAPI (blue) show nucleus morphology in MHCC-97H ( C ) and HCC-LY10 cells ( D ) with RIT1 knockdown and controls (left). The quantitation histogram showing the percentage of cells with multinuclear (right). Cells were enriched in mitosis utilizing nocodazole. Scale bars, 20 μm.  E  Flow cytometry analysis of apoptosis in MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells with RIT1 knockdown and control group (left). The quantitation histogram showing the percentage apoptotic cells (right). Data are presented as mean ± SD of three independent experiments. ***  P  < 0.001. The  P  values were calculated by unpaired Student’s  t -test RIT1 interacts with SMC3 in HCC cells   Previous studies on the oncogenic mechanism of RIT1 have focused mainly on its regulation of the RAS/MAPK pathway. A recent study revealed that the RIT1 is diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm during mitosis and interacts with MAD2, a component of the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), to negatively regulate SAC activity [ 27 ]. To explore the underlying molecular mechanism by which RIT1 regulates mitosis in HCC, we transfected Myc-tagged RIT1 plasmids into Huh7, Hep3B, and HCC-LY10 cells and detected RIT1 distribution during different cell cycle stages by immunofluorescence staining with an anti-Myc antibody. The results demonstrated that RIT1 exhibited diffuse cytoplasmic localization during interphase and gradually accumulated around the chromosomes during mitosis (Fig.  3 A and Fig.  S3 A). These results further suggested that RIT1 is closely associated with mitotic processes in HCC.   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   RIT1 interacts with SMC3 in HCC cells.  A  Immunofluorescence staining of Myc-tag (red) and DAPI (blue) shows the distribution of RIT1 at different cell cycle phases in HCC-LY10 and Huh7 cells transfected with Myc-RIT1 plasmid. Scale bars, 20 μm.  B  Heat map of mitotic chromosome segregation-related proteins across Myc-RIT1-precipitated compared to IgG-precipitated group in HCC-LY10, Huh7, and Hep3B cells transfected with Myc-RIT1 plasmid.  C  Co-IP analysis of RIT1 and SMC3 in HCC-LY10, Huh7 and Hep3B cells transfected with Myc-RIT1 plasmid. Cell lysates from indicated cells were immunoprecipitated using an anti-Myc antibody (upper section) and an anti-SMC3 antibody (lower section).  D  Interaction of RIT1 and SMC3 was analyzed by Co-IP analysis in 293T cells co-transfected with Myc-RIT1 and Flag-SMC3 plasmids. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated using an anti-Myc antibody (upper section) and an anti-Flag antibody (lower section).  E  Schematic presentation of structural domain of RIT1.  F  Co-IP analysis of the indicated RIT1 truncation and wild-type with SMC3 for their interaction position in 293T cells co-transfected with Myc-RIT1 (WT, ΔN or ΔC) and Flag-SMC3 plasmids.  G  Co-IP analysis of RIT1 and SMC3 in Huh7 and HCC-LY10 cells with RIT1 overexpression during asynchronous and synchronized to mitosis (Full indicates asynchronization treatment; Mitosis indicates cells were enriched in mitosis).  H  Colocalization of RIT1 and SMC3 during interphase and different phases of mitosis was analyzed by co-immunofluorescence staining (Myc-RIT1: red, SMC3: green, DAPI: blue) in HCC-LY10 (left) and Huh7 (right) cells transfected with Myc-RIT1 plasmid. Scale bars, 20 μm Mitosis is a process involving multiple protein interactions. Based on the subcellular localization pattern of RIT1 during mitosis, we hypothesized that RIT1 may affect the mitotic process of HCC cells by interacting with regulatory proteins involved in mitosis. Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) combined with mass spectrometry (MS) was performed to screen for potential RIT1 interacting proteins in HCC-LY10, Huh7, and Hep3B cells transfected with Myc-tagged RIT1 plasmid. The screening for interacting proteins was based on their abundance in the Myc-RIT1 group, which was three times higher than that in the control IgG group. By intersecting the results from all three cell lines (Fig.  S4 A), we observed that MAD2 protein was not detected in our MS analysis; however, several proteins associated with regulation of mitotic chromosome separation, including structural maintenance of chromosome 3 (SMC3), structural maintenance of chromosome 2 (SMC2), polo like kinase 1 (PLK1), and protein kinase, DNA-activated, catalytic subunit (PRKDC) proteins, were identified in the intersection of three cell lines. In addition, we found that PDS5A and PDS5B, chromosomal cohesin regulatory subunits, were present at two cell intersections (Fig.  3 B).   We selected SMC3, SMC2, PLK1, and PRKDC, which were present at the three-cell intersections, for further validation. Co-IP and western blotting analyses revealed that only SMC3 interacted with RIT1 in HCC-LY10, Huh7, and Hep3B cells (Fig.  3 C and Fig.  S4 B). The interaction between RIT1 and SMC3 was further verified in 293T cells co-transfected with Myc-RIT1 and Flag-SMC3 plasmids (Fig.  3 D). To determine which domain of RIT1 interacts with SMC3, wild-type or truncated Myc-RIT1 was transfected with Flag-SMC3 plasmids in 293T cells and immunoprecipitation and western blot were performed using anti-Myc and anti- Flag antibodies, respectively. The results showed that the wild-type and N-terminal deletion constructs of Myc-RIT1 could bind to SMC3, whereas the C-terminal deletion construct could not, indicating that the binding sites were present in the C-terminal domain of RIT1 (Fig.  3 E, F). Moreover, Co-IP analyses with cells asynchronized or synchronized to mitosis showed that the interaction between RIT1 and SMC3 was significantly enhanced during mitosis (Fig.  3 G). IF assays showed apparent colocalization of RIT1 with SMC3 proteins during mitosis in HCC-LY10, Huh7, and Hep3B cells (Fig.  3 H and Fig.  S5A ). These results suggest that RIT1 interacts with SMC3, which is essential for mitosis in HCC. SMC3 is essential for RIT1-mediated cell proliferation in HCC   Due to the interaction between RIT1 and SMC3, we hypothesized that RIT1 might play a regulatory role in mitosis through SMC3 in HCC cells. To investigate the role of SMC3 in RIT1-mediated HCC progression, we analyzed the mRNA expression of SMC3 in the TCGA LIHC database. As shown in Fig.  4 A, SMC3 expression was significantly higher in HCC tissues than in non-cancerous tissues. We further examined the protein expression of SMC3 in 36 pairs of HCC tissues and matched non-cancerous tissues from our lab using western blot analysis. Consistent with the results of TCGA dataset analysis, SMC3 was highly expressed in HCC tissues compared with that in non-cancerous tissues (Fig.  S6 A, B). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining for SMC3 was performed on tissue samples from 201 patients with HCC, and patients were divided into high-SMC3 expression group (110 cases) and low-SMC3 expression group (91 cases) according to their IHC staining scores (Fig.  4 B). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed that high SMC3 expression in patients with HCC was associated with a short survival time (Fig.  4 C). These results indicate that SMC3 is highly expressed in HCC and is associated with a poor prognosis.   Fig. 4.     Open in a new tab   SMC3 is upregulated in HCC and contributes to HCC proliferation.  A  mRNA expression of SMC3 in 374 HCC tissues and 50 non-cancerous tissues in the TCGA LIHC database (left). mRNA expression of SMC3 in 50 pairs of HCC tissues and adjacent non-cancerous tissues in the TCGA LIHC database (right).  B  Representative IHC staining images of high and low SMC3 expression in 201 HCC tissue samples, including 110 cases of high expression and 91 cases of low expression based on the IHC staining score; scale bars, 200 μm.  C  Kaplan-Meier analysis showing the overall survival of 186 patients with HCC with high-SMC3 and low-SMC3 expression; HR, Hazard Ratio,  P  = 0.00016.  D  CCK8 assay for MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells with SMC3 knockdown and control.  E  Colony formation assay of MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells with SMC3 knockdown and control.  F  Flow cytometry analysis of the cell cycle of MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells with SMC3 knockdown and control (left). Quantitation histograms showing the percentage of cells in different phases of the cell cycle (right panel).  G  Flow cytometry analysis of apoptosis in MHCC-97H cells with SMC3-knockdown and control cells (left). Quantitation histogram showing the percentage of apoptotic cells (right).  H  Representative immunofluorescence staining images of α-tubulin (red) and DAPI (blue) showing spindle morphology during mitosis in MHCC-97H cells with SMC3 knockdown and control(left). The quantitation histogram showing the percentage of cells with multispindle polar (right). Cells were enriched in mitosis using nocodazole. Scale bars, 20 μm.  I  Representative immunofluorescence staining images of α-tubulin (red) and DAPI (blue) show nucleus morphology in MHCC-97H cells with SMC3 knockdown and control (left). The quantitation histogram showing the percentage of cells with multinuclear (right). Scale bars, 20 μm. Data are presented as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. **  P  < 0.01, ***  P  < 0.001. The  P  values were calculated by paired Student’s  t -test in ( A ), log-rank test in ( C ), and unpaired Student’s  t -test in (D-I) To further investigate the role of SMC3 in HCC cells, we examined the expression of SMC3 protein in various HCC cell lines and knocked down SMC3 via shRNA in MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells and verified the silencing efficiency using western blotting (Fig.  S6 C, D). Similar effects were observed after SMC3- and RIT1-knockdown in HCC cells. SMC3 knockdown significantly inhibited proliferation and colony formation of MHCC-97H and HCC-LY10 cells (Fig.