>Materials and methods   Ethics statement   The owners of the sampled apiaries gave us permissions to collect honey bee samples. No additional permits were required because the study did not involve endangered or protected species. Field honey bee sample collection   Honey bee workers from 20  A. cerana  colonies and 20  A. mellifera  colonies were collected from four apiaries located in Kunming, Hangzhou, Beijing, and Guangzhou in June 2019. In each apiary, five  A. cerana  and five  A. mellifera  colonies were sampled. To collect foraging workers, colony entrances were blocked, and approximately 100 workers carrying pollen were sampled. After chilling bees at 4 °C to immobilise them, the ileum and rectum (hindgut) of individual bees were dissected using sterile forceps and iris scissors. A total of 50 dissected guts from each colony were pooled together, submerged in 50% glycerol, and stored at −80 °C. DNA extraction, library preparation, and sequencing   Before DNA extraction, the gut bacteria were enriched according to Ellegaard et al.  [7] , in which the gut tissue was homogenised with a bead-beater using glass beads. The homogenates were centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min to remove debris, and the supernatant was collected into new Eppendorf tubes. The samples were then centrifuged at 10000 g  for 10 min to pellet the bacterial cells. The supernatant was removed, and the bacterial pellets were resuspended in PBS and centrifuged again at 500 g  for 5 min. Finally, the samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g  for 15 min to pellet the bacterial cells.   Bacterial DNA was extracted using a CTAB-based DNA extraction protocol. For the DNA sample preparation, 200 ng DNA per sample was used as input material. First the DNA sample was fragmented by sonication to a size of 350 bp. Then, sequencing libraries were constructed using the NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit (NEB, USA), and index codes were added to attribute sequences to each sample. Specifically, the Chip DNA was purified using the AMPure XP system (Beckman Coulter, USA). After adenylation of the 3′ ends of DNA fragments, the NEBNext Adaptor with a hairpin loop structure was ligated to prepare for hybridisation. Following this, 3 µL USER Enzyme (NEB, USA) was added to the adaptor-ligated DNA, and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 15 min followed by 95 °C for 5 min. PCR was carried out with Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase, Universal PCR primers, and Index (X) primers provided in NEBNext Multiplex (NEB, USA). Finally, PCR products were purified (AMPure XP system) and library quality was assessed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq system by Novagene Co., Ltd. Sequence quality control and assembly   To obtain high-quality reads, the raw fastq data from the Illumina NovaSeq platform were trimmed to remove low-quality (30% of bases with Q < 15 per read), ambiguous bases (N > 5% per read) and the overlap with adapter sequences of ≥ 5 bp. For each sample, scaffolds were then assembled using Megahit v1.2 with parameters “- k-list 45,55,67,73”. Metagenome assembly and gene prediction   For scaftigs (see Glossary) >500 bp in each sample, the open reading frames (ORFs) were predicted using MetaGeneMark with the MetaGeneMark_v1.mod model. The CD-HIT program  [34]  was used to obtain an initial non-redundant gene catalogue (nrGC) from the predicted ORFs (>100 bp) with parameters “-c 0.95, -aS 0.9”. The abundance of non-redundant genes (unigenes) was measured by realigning the reads to the nrGC using SoapAligner  [35] . Genes with ≤ 2 mapped sequences in all samples were excluded from further analysis. To calculate the relative abundance of a gene, the number of reads that were aligned to the gene was scaled by the gene length and the total number of reads that were mapped to the entire non-redundant gene catalogue for each sample. Taxonomic and functional assignment of genes   To obtain the taxonomic information of unigenes, DIAMOND v0.9 was used to search the assembly against the NCBI microNR database (including bacteria, fungi, archaea, and viruses, version 13 July 2019) with a blastp, e value ≤ 1 × 10 −5  threshold. The taxonomic information of each gene was determined using the lowest common ancestor-based algorithm (LCA) implemented in MEGAN (version 4, Tübingen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany). Alpha diversity (see Glossary) was calculated using vegan  [36]  and picante packages  [37]  in the R statistical software  [38] . The taxonomic compositions at the genus and species levels were organised as 0/1 (presence/absence) matrix and were input into the PanGP program  [39]  for core/pan analyses with the default parameter.   Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)  [40]  annotation and Carbohydrate-Active enzymes Database (CAZy)  [41]  of each gene were also performed using DIAMOND against the KEGG database and CAZy database (version: 25 November 2014), respectively. The relative abundance of the annotated functional features was calculated by summing the relative abundances of the genes annotated to the features. Strain-level nucleotide diversity analysis   The strains of  Bartonella apis  BBC0122 ( NZ_CP015625.1 )  [42] ,  Bifidobacterium asteroides  PRL2011 ( NC_018720.1 )  [43] ,  Frischella perrara  PEB0191 ( NZ_CP009056.1 )  [44] ,  Gilliamella apicola  wkB1 ( NZ_CP007445.1 )  [45] , and  Snodgrassella alvi  wkB2 ( NZ_CP007446.1 )  [45]  were selected as representatives of the five core species according to Ellegaard et al.  [7] . Their complete genomes were employed as references for mapping the raw reads of the five bacterial species in our study. The reference genes, which were defined in this study as the genes conserved among the five representative genomes, were identified by pairwise BLAST searches (blastp, e value ≤ 1 × 10 −20 ) (see additional file 8 at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/SEMYG). Bowtie2 was used for mapping the raw reads against the nucleotide sequences of these reference genes  [46] . Based on the alignment results, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) were identified using Samtools, mpileup, and Vcftools  [47] . The SNPs located within the reference genes were used as the input for principal component analysis (PCA) by using PLINK v2.0 with default parameters  [48] . Furthermore, the dominant allele sequences of these reference genes for each sample were concatenated for their use as inputs for the subsequent evolutionary analyses. MEGA v10.0.5, was used to construct the neighbour-joining trees, with the Jukes-Cantor (JC) substitution model and 100 bootstrap replicates  [49] . The pairwise nucleotide distances were also calculated by using MEGA with the JC model. Strain-level gene content analysis   For each of the five core bacterial species, the ORFs assigned to each species were extracted according to the taxonomic assignment. Within each species, the homologous relationship among the predicted ORFs was determined by comparing the protein sequences of the ORFs with the blastclust program in the NCBI BLAST package; the parameters 0.5 length coverage (-L) and 80% protein identity (-S) were applied. After binning the ORFs into gene clusters, the abundance of each gene cluster was obtained by summing the abundances of all ORFs belonging to the gene cluster. A gene cluster with an abundance > 0 was considered to be present in the sample; otherwise, it was considered absent. The pairwise similarity of gene content between samples was defined as the number of shared gene clusters divided by the number of identified gene clusters for the compared samples. Strain-level functional analysis   For each of the five core bacterial species, the ORFs assigned to each species were extracted according to the taxonomic assignment. Subsequently, the ORFs were binned into functional units according to their functional annotations. The abundance of each functional unit was obtained by summing the abundances of ORFs belonging to the functional unit. Finally, principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) and principal component analysis (PCA) were performed on the abundances of functional units among the samples. Cross-species colonisation assays   A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  gut bacteria were prepared as follows: 10 honey bee forager workers were sampled near the entrance of a colony of each honey bee species in Hangzhou. Their hindguts were dissected immediately and homogenised in 1 mL PBS. The gut homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min, and the supernatant was removed to eliminate possible virus contamination. To prepare pollen containing gut bacteria, the isolated bacteria were resuspended in 1 mL PBS, and 100 μL suspension was mixed with sterilised pollen.   Germ-free  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  workers were obtained using the protocol described by Zheng et al.  [31] . The germ-free workers were divided into four groups for the cross-species colonisation assays: 1) Acc:  A. cerana  workers inoculated with  A. cerana  gut microbiota; 2) Amc:  A. mellifera  workers inoculated with  A. cerana  gut microbiota; 3) Amm:  A. mellifera  workers inoculated with  A. mellifera  gut microbiota; and 4) Acm:  A. cerana  workers inoculated with  A. mellifera  gut microbiota. Each group consisted of 60 workers placed in a single cage. Different groups of workers were supplied with pollen containing respective gut bacteria described for 5 days and then switched to sterilised pollen. Approximately 1 × 10 5  bacterial cells were fed to each honey bee worker. In addition, another cage of germ-free  A. cerana  and germ-free  A. mellifera  workers with no inoculation of gut bacteria were used as a negative control to confirm that honey bees were not contaminated by bacteria from other sources, and contamination was not observed. Honey bees were housed according to standard methods  [50] . On day ten, from each cage, forty workers were sampled and pooled for metagenome sequencing as described above, ten workers were sampled and pooled for untargeted metabolomics analysis, and five workers were sampled and used for 16s rDNA quantification individually. The experiment was conducted in triplicate using three  A. cerana  and three  A. mellifera  colonies.   Quantification of the absolute bacterial loads of cross-species colonisation honey bee samples   The absolute bacterial loads of Acc, Acm, Amm, and Amc workers were determined by qPCR using universal bacterial 16S rRNA primers (F: 5′-AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′, R: 5′-CTGCTGCCTCCCGTAGGAGT-3′)  [22] . Workers were frozen at −20 °C until immobilised, and their guts were immediately dissected in RNase-free water and used for DNA extraction. DNA was extracted using a TIANamp Stool DNA Kit (Tiangen Biotech Co., Ltd, Beijing, China) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. 16 s rRNA copy numbers were quantified using the StepOne Plus real-time PCR system with thermal cycling conditions as follows: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, 40 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s and 60 °C for 30 s, followed by a melting curve from 60 °C to 95 °C at 0.5 °C/5 s increments. Metabolite extraction   The replicates of each group were shipped on dry ice to Novogene Corporation (Beijing, China) for metabolomic analysis. Pooled honey bee hindguts were ground with liquid nitrogen, and the homogenate was resuspended with pre-chilled 80% methanol and 0.1% formic acid. The suspensions were cooled on ice for 5 min and then centrifuged at 15,000 g  at 4 °C for 5 min. The supernatant was diluted to a final concentration containing 53% methanol using LC-MS grade water. The solution was transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 15,000 g  at 4 °C for 10 min to obtain the supernatant for analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted using a Vanquish UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive series mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States). Samples were injected onto a Hyperil Gold column (100 × 2.1 mm, 1.9 μm) using a 16-min linear gradient at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The eluents for the positive polarity mode were eluent A (0.1% FA in water) and eluent B (methanol). The eluents for the negative polarity mode were eluent A (5 mM ammonium acetate, pH 9.0) and eluent B (methanol). The gradient elution was set as follows: 1.5 min, 2% B; 12.0 min, 2–100% B; 14.0 min, 100% B; 14.1 min, 100–2% B; 17 min, 2% B. The Q Exactive series mass spectrometer was operated in positive/negative polarity mode with a spray voltage of 3.2 kV, capillary temperature of 320 °C, sheath gas flow rate of 35 arb, and aux gas flow rate of 10 arb. Untargeted metabolomics data analysis   Compound Discoverer 3.1 (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) was used to perform peak alignment, peak picking, and quantitation for each metabolite, with the following settings: retention time tolerance, 0.2 min; actual mass tolerance, 5 ppm; signal intensity tolerance, 30%; signal/noise ratio, 3; and minimum intensity, 100,000. The peak intensities were then normalised to the total spectral intensity. The normalised data were used to predict the molecular formula based on the additive ions, molecular ion peaks, and fragment ions. Peaks were then matched with the mzCloud, mzVault, and MassList databases to obtain accurate qualitative and relative quantitative results. The area normalisation method was applied to the data that were not normally distributed. The metabolites were annotated using the HMDB database ( http://www.hmdb.ca/ ), Lipidmaps database ( http://www.lipidmaps.org/ ), and KEGG database ( http://www.genome.jp/kegg/ ). PCA and hierarchical clustering were performed using MetaboAnalyst  [51] . Statistical significance (P-value) was calculated using univariate analysis ( t -test). Statistical analysis   Statistical analysis was performed using the R software v3.6.1  [38] . The significant taxonomic and functional differences between  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  samples were determined by Student’s t-tests. For comparisons of the pairwise distance of SNP, gene content similarity, and 16 s rDNA copy number, Kruskal-Wallis tests were used. All P values were adjusted using the false discovery rate (FDR) method, and adjusted P values < 0.05, were considered as statistically significant  [52] . Hierarchical clustering was conducted using the hclust function in the stats package. PCA was performed using the prcomp function and PCoA based on the Bray-Curtis distance was performed using the ape library  [53] . The Adonis test was used to distinguish group similarity, and the statistic R 2  represents effect size, which reveals the percentage of variation in distances explained by the grouping being tested. The Mantel test was used to test for differences across geographical populations. Metabolites with VIP > 1, P value < 0.05, and fold change ≥ 2 or fold change ≤ 0.5, were considered to be differential metabolites. The differential abundance of taxonomy and functional category was tested using Metastat  [54] . Availability of data and material   The raw sequence data from metagenome shotgun sequencing were submitted to NCBI SRA under BioProject accession numbers PRJNA599289 (field honey bees) and PRJNA599288 (cross-species colonisation assay). All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article and its supplementary information files at OSF, https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/SEMYG. Results   Characterisation of the  Apis cerana  and  A. mellifera  gut community   High-throughput sequencing metagenomics and the  de novo  assembly of paired-end reads resulted in 1,765,642 scaffolds with an average length of 1.36 kb. Detailed quality metrics, including the number of reads, reads mapped to contigs, reads that were successfully annotated, and reads that were mapped to honey bee genomes are listed in supplementary file Table S1 in the Open Science Framework, https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/SEMYG. Rarefaction analysis of our samples revealed a curve approaching saturation (Fig. S1), demonstrating that the vast majority of  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  gut microbial genes were present in our gene catalogues.   Consistent with previous studies  [7] ,  [15] ,  [21] , the overall community profile showed that  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  guts were both dominated by six genera in our samples, namely,  Lactobacillus ,  Bifidobacterium ,  Snodgrassella ,  Bartonella ,  Gilliamella,  and  Frischella . The guts of the  A. cerana  workers also harboured a significant amount of the genus  Apibacter , whereas the  A. mellifera  gut was colonised by the genus  Commensalibacter  ( Fig. 2 A).   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Gut community of  Apis cerana  and  A. mellifera  workers. (A) Composition at genus level. (B) Heatmap of the composition of  Lactobacillus  at species level. The colours represent the relative abundance of each bacterial species. (C) Principal Component Analysis of overall bacteria at species level. Symbols are coloured according to the host species and shaped according to the region of sampling. AcBJ:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Beijing; AcGZ:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Guangzhou; AcHZ:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Hangzhou; AcKM:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Kunming; AmBJ:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Beijing; AmGZ:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Guangzhou; AmHZ:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Hangzhou; AmKM:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Kunming; USA: metagenome sample of  A. mellifera  from United States (50). Taking advantage of the high resolution of the metagenome, we analysed and compared gut bacteria compositions at the species level (Fig. S2). Of the six core bacterial genera,  Bifidobacterium asteroides ,  Snodgrassella alvi ,  Bartonella apis ,  Gilliamella apicola,  and  Frischella perrara  were the dominant species identified in both  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  (Fig. S3), and we referred to these five bacterial species as the core bacterial species of  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  throughout our study. Contrasting this, we found that the genus  Lactobacillus  was composed of multiple species, which varied significantly in the gut biota of the two honey bee species ( Fig. 2 B). PCA and PCoA of the bacterial communities at the species level showed that the gut communities of sympatric  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  were distinguishable at the species level ( Fig. 2 C, S4, Adonis test: P = 0.005). Furthermore, samples within each honey bee species were clustered together based on their geographic locations ( Fig. 2 C, Mantel test: P = 0.02). Interestingly, when we reanalysed the metagenome data of  A. mellifera  from the USA, which was published by Engel et al.  [4] , this sample was grouped within  A. mellifera  samples from Guangzhou ( Fig. 2 C), suggesting that the geographical separation of the samples might not be solely determined by the geographical distance between the sampling locations. Strain-level diversity of  Apis cerana  and  A. mellifera  core bacteria species   The intra-specific diversity of the  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  core bacterial species was demonstrated through the single nucleotide polymorphisms present in the  B. apis ,  B. asteroides ,  F. perrara ,  G. apicola , and  S. alvi , of  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  species living in the same habitat in China.   PCA and PCoA analyses based on the SNP patterns revealed that different hosts carry diverse strains. Specifically,  B. asteroides ,  S. alvi ,  G. apicola , and  F. perrara  strains in  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  colonies were distinctly host-specific, and  B. apis  strains were also largely host-specific ( Fig. 3 A, S4, Adonis test: all P = 0.001). However, the geographical region failed to correlate with any notable difference between these five core bacterial species ( Fig. 3 A, Mantel test: all P > 0.05). We also constructed a phylogenetic tree using the dominant alleles as representative sequences for each sample and found that the dominant strains of each  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera  samples formed separate branches ( Fig. 3 B). The only exception was  B. apis ; the predominant strains of four  A. mellifera  samples (from three different sampling locations) and  A. cerana  samples were twined together ( Fig. 3 B). We then compared their SNP similarity and stratified them into intra- and inter-host comparisons ( Fig. 3 C). We found that the intra-host comparisons possessed more similar strains within  A. cerana  as compared to  A. mellifera , which demonstrated that the diversity of the gut microbiota was higher in  A. mellifera  at the strain level, but with the exception of  G. apicola . These findings are consistent with those of previous studies  [15] ,  [21] .   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Strain-level diversity of  Apis cerana  and  A. mellifera  core bacterial species. (A) Principal Component Analysis of  Bartonella apis ,  Bifidobacterium asteroides ,  Frischella perrara ,  Gilliamela apicola , and  Snodgrassella alvi  strains. (B) Phylogenetic tree of  B. apis ,  B. asteroides ,  F. perrara ,  G. apicola , and  S. alvi  strains. The geographical origin of the strains is indicated to the right of the tree. (C) Average SNP pairwise distance per genome for  B. apis ,  B. asteroides ,  F. perrara ,  G. apicola , and  S. alvi  strains. For each boxplot, the center line displays the median and whiskers span minimum to maximum. Different letters represent significant differences (Kruskal-Wallis test, P < 0.001). Within Ac: intra-host comparison within  A. cerana ; within Am: intra-host comparison within  A. mellifera ; Ac VS Am: inter-host comparison between  A. cerana  and  A. mellifera.  AcBJ:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Beijing; AcGZ:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Guangzhou; AcHZ:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Hangzhou; AcKM:  A. cerana  workers sampled in Kunming; AmBJ:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Beijing; AmGZ:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Guangzhou; AmHZ:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Hangzhou; AmKM:  A. mellifera  workers sampled in Kunming; USA: metagenome sample of  A. mellifera  from the United States (50). Throughout this figure, the colour red has been used for  A. cerana  and blue for  A. mellifera . Functional variation in the distinctive strains of  Apis cerana  and  A. mellifera     The aforementioned strain-level distinction be