>MATERIALS AND METHODS   Cryosectioning   Rat brain tissue was provided by NCSU Department of Biological Sciences and experiments were performed in accordance with NCSU IACUC. Brain tissue was acquired from Wistar rat following CO 2  asphyxiation and rapid decapitation. Harvested tissue was flash frozen on powdered dry ice, wrapped in foil, and stored at −80°C until the time of analysis. Rat brain was mounted onto a specimen disc with optimal cutting temperature medium and cryosectioned to a thickness of 12 μm. Adjacent tissue sections were thaw-mounted onto glass microscope slides and PEN-membrane slides for IR-MALDESI and nanoPOTS analysis, respectively. Sectioned tissue for IR-MALDESI was analyzed immediately and tissue for nanoPOTS analysis was sent to Brigham Young University overnight on dry ice. Metabolomic Mass Spectrometry Imaging   IR-MALDESI Analysis.   Sectioned brain tissue for IR-MALDESI analysis was placed directly on the Peltier-cooled translational stage inside the sample enclosure purged with nitrogen gas (Arc3 Gases, Raleigh, NC, USA) and a thin ice layer was formed by controlled exposure to humidity. An electrospray ionization source was achieved with 50% optima LC-MS grade methanol (Fisher Scientific Hampton, NH, USA) and 0.2% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) solution at a flow rate of 1.5 μL/min and spray voltage of 4000 V. A mid-IR laser Opolette 2731/3034 (Opotek, Carlsbad, CA, USA) operating at 2.94 μm was used for laser ablation at 1.1 mJ per voxel with a spatial resolution set to 150 μm. IR-MALDESI was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Breman, Germany) for high resolution accurate mass spectrometry at a resolving power of 140,000 FWHM  at 200  m/z . Automatic gain control (AGC) was disabled and a fixed injection time of 25 ms was set to synchronize the laser ablation event with collection of ions in the C-trap. External lock masses (157.0835  m/z  and 371.1012  m/z ) were used for high mass accuracy. Data Analysis for IR-MALDESI.   Thermo .RAW data files were converted to mzML files using MSConvert 26  and then to imzML files using imzMLconverter 27 . All ion images were generated and analyzed using MSiReader, an open-source MATLAB software for imaging analyses. 28 , 29  The MSiImage tool in MSiReader was used to overlay the optical image taken after microdissection on the nanoPOTS brain section. With the optical image overlayed on the IR-MALDESI dataset, regions of interest were selected and saved to match the nanoPOTS dissected regions. The MSiPeakfinder tool was used to find ions that were 2× more abundant in one ROI or at least 80% present in one ROI and less than 20% present in other ROIs. These ions were then manually searched against HMDB 30 – 33  and METLIN 34  databases for putative identifications based on mass and spectral accuracy. Additionally, the data was uploaded into METASPACE, an online MSI annotation software, to annotate metabolites and lipids based on spectral accuracy, spatial informativeness, and spatially correlated isotopes at a 20% false discovery rate using HMDB, LipidMaps, and SwissLipids databases. 35 Spatially Resolved Proteome Profiling   Tissue Staining and Microdissection.   Tissue fixative solution (70% ethanol) was pre-cooled to 4°C before use. The brain tissue section was immediately immersed into 70% ethanol for 15s after removal from the −80°C freezer or dry ice box. Brain tissue was rehydrated in deionized water and immersed in Mayer’s hematoxylin solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 20s, dipped in deionized water to remove excess dye solution, and immersed in Scott’s Tap Water Substitute (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10s to dye the tissue section. Following a wash in 70% ethanol, the tissue was immersed in eosin Y solution for 5s. Finally, tissue dehydration was performed by sequentially immersing the tissue section in 95% ethanol three times followed by two rapid rinses in 100% ethanol. The section was dried in a fume hood for 10 min and stored at −80°C until use.   Nanowell chips were fabricated in house as described previously. 20  Before experiments, nanowells were prepopulated with 200 nL DMSO droplets that served as capture medium. 21  Laser capture microdissection (LCM) was performed on a PALM MicroBeam system (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Munich, Germany). A slide adapter (SlideCollector 48, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging) was used to mount the nanowell chip on the LCM microscope. Five distinct regions of the brain were extracted via LCM and were composed of the cerebral cortex, caudate putamen, corpus callosum and septal area ( Figure 1 ). Four 100 × 100 μm tissue voxels were collected from each region of interest and pooled into nanowells. Cutting was performed using the 5× objective and with an energy level of 60. The “CenterRoboLPC” function with an energy level of delta 8 and a focus level of delta 15 was used to catapult tissue voxels into DMSO droplets. The “CapCheck” function was activated to confirm successful sample collection from tissue sections to DMSO droplets. The collected samples could be processed directly or stored at −20°C until use.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Optical image of 12 μm rat brain tissue section mounted on a PEN-membrane slide for nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS analysis with each dissected region annotated as ROI 1–5. Proteomic Sample Processing.   Following tissue capture, the nanowell chip was heated to 70°C for 10 min to evaporate the DMSO droplet. A nanoliter-resolution robotic liquid handling platform was employed to dispense reagents into nanowells. First, 100 nL of cell lysis buffer containing 0.2% (w/v) n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM dithiothreitol in PBS was deposited into each nanowell. The chip was incubated at 70°C for 1 hr for cell lysis, protein extraction and denaturation. Next, 50 nL of 30 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer (pH 8.0) were added to each well and incubated in the dark for 30 min. Protein digestion was performed by dispensing 50 nL of 0.01 ng/nL Lys-C (MS grade, Promega, Madison, USA) and trypsin (Promega) in ABC buffer, and incubated for 4 hr and 8 hr, respectively. Finally, the enzymatic reaction was terminated by adding 50 nL of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid in aqueous buffer and incubated for 30 min. Samples were then collected into a short length of 200 μm i.d. capillary tubing that was then sealed on both ends with Parafilm and stored at −20°C until use. NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis.   Prior to separation, the sample was transferred from the storage capillary to a home-packed 75 μm-i.d., 5-cm-long SPE column for desalting by infusing mobile phase A (MP A; 0.1% formic acid in water) at a flow rate of 1 μL/min for 10 min using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano pump (Thermo Fisher). The SPE column was then connected to an in-house slurry-packed 30 mm-i.d., 50 cm-long LC column with a zero-dead-volume union (Valco, Houston, TX). Chromatographic media for both the SPE and LC columns were 3 mm C18 porous particles having 300 Å pores (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). The LC separation flow rate was ~40 nL/min, which was achieved using a flow splitter. A linear 100 min gradient of 8–22% mobile phase B (MP B; 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was followed by a 20 min gradient of 22–45% MP B that was used to elute hydrophobic peptides. The gradient was then ramped to 90% MP B over 5 min and held for 5 min to wash the column. Finally, the gradient was ramped to 2% MP B over 5 min and held for 15 min to re-equilibrate the column. Electrospray ionization was performed using a 10-μm-i.d. chemically etched emitter that was coupled to the separation column using a VICI nanovolume union.   An Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer with the Nanospray Flex ion source was used. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the ion transfer tube was set to 200°C. For MS1, the Orbitrap resolution was set to 120,000 FWHM  at 200  m/z  with the normalized AGC target of 100%. The maximum injection time was set to 250 ms. Precursor ions of +2 to +6 charge and having a minimum intensity of 5000 were selected for MS2 analysis. The exclusion duration was set to 90s, HCD collision energy was 30% and the isolation window was 1.6. Orbitrap resolution for MS2 was 60,000 FWHM  at 200  m/z  and maximum injection time was 250 ms. Data Analysis for nanoPOTS.   Thermo .RAW files were searched against the  Rattus norvegicus  Uniprot Database using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305. Tryptic peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and 2 maximum missed cleavage sites were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. 36  Dynamic modifications searched were methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. N-terminal modifications included acetylation and methionine loss/acetylation. Static modifications searched included carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues. The percolator algorithm with a 1% FDR rate was used to identify false positives. 37 Multiomic Pathway Integration   Enzymes in the nanoPOTS dataset were searched in KEGG pathway database for the  Rattus norvegicus  species. 38 , 39  Reactant and product metabolites were searched against the IR-MALDESI dataset. Pathways in which enzyme, reactant and product metabolites were detected were investigated for correlations between each brain region. The correlations between grouped abundances of enzymes and average abundances of product metabolites in each ROI were calculated in Excel. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION   To create a multimodal mass spectrometry imaging technique, two adjacent rat brain tissue sections were analyzed by IR-MALDESI-MSI and nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS. Each dataset was then analyzed independently of each other to find unique observations and trends within the dataset. While IR-MALDESI analyzed the entire tissue section, nanoPOTS dissected and focused on five primary regions of the brain to reduce the analytical complexity required for experiments and data analysis for our preliminary investigations. The five brain regions analyzed are labeled ROI 1–5 for simplicity ( Figure 1 ) and comprised of different areas of the cerebral cortex (ROI 1 & 2), caudate putamen (ROI 3), corpus callosum (ROI 4) and septal area (ROI 5). 40  These five regions were selected in the IR-MALDESI metabolomic dataset by using the MSiImage and ROI tools in MSiReader. 29  The optical image taken after tissue dissection for nanoPOTS analysis was overlayed on the IR-MALDESI data in MSiReader with the MSiImage tool. The ROIs were then drawn around the dissected regions of the optical image using the ROI tool in MSiReader.   The MSiPeakfinder tool was used to find ions that were significantly different between regions of the brain. The MSiPeakfinder tool allows the user to select two regions of interest at one time, so every combination of the five ROIs (i.e., ROI 1v2, ROI 1v3, ROI 1v4, etc.) was searched for significant differences. Specifically, ions that were 80% higher in one region and less than 20% lower in the reference region or at least 2x more abundant were searched with the MSiPeakfinder tool. A large quantity of ions from all combinations examined (1770  m/z  values) fit this description but were filtered down via deisotoping and annotation. From the combinations investigated, three primary spatial patterns were observed, as shown by examples in  Figure 2 . Ions were 1) homogenously distributed across the whole brain tissue ( Figure 2A ),  2 ) significantly more ( Figure 2B ) or 3) significantly less ( Figure 2C ) abundant in ROI 4 (the corpus callosum). ROI 4 appeared to have the only significant differences in abundance of metabolites compared to other brain regions.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Metabolites detected by IR-MALDESI and putatively identified by accurate mass and spectral accuracy using METASPACE, HMDB, and Metlin databases. Example metabolites represent ion images with  A)  homogenous spatial distributions,  B)  higher abundance in ROI 4 (corpus callosum) and  C)  lower abundance in ROI 4 (corpus callosum). Metabolites found using the MSiPeakfinder tool were then putatively annotated by accurate mass and spectral accuracy using HMDB and METLIN databases, as well as METASPACE annotation software. Examples of putative identifications are shown in  Figure 2 . A total of 326 annotated metabolites were found to have a significant fold change (0.5<FC>2) between ROI 4 and another region of the brain ( Table S1 ). Of the 326 putatively annotated metabolites, 58 were significantly lower in ROI 4 while 268 were significantly higher in ROI 4. Overall, the IR-MALDESI metabolomic data shows that ROI 4 (corpus callosum) had significantly different metabolomic compositions compared to other regions of the brain.   On an adjacent tissue section, five brain regions were dissected and analyzed using nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS for highly sensitive proteomics analysis. Four 100 × 100 μm tissue voxels were dissected by LCM collected from each ROI and combined in nanowells to create two samples per brain region. Each nanowell was prepared with a bottom-up proteomics workflow and subsequently analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Datasets were then uploaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.4 to identify peptides and their corresponding proteins identified in rat brain ROIs. Annotated proteins were filtered to produce approximately 1600 high confidence proteins that represented master proteins with less than 20% CV of grouped abundances and containing a minimum of 2 unique peptides ( Table S2 ). Proteins identified as contaminants (keratin and trypsin) were also filtered out of the dataset. Proteins detected in each sample ranged from 1496 to 1637 proteins ( Figure 3 ) which is a significant number of proteins that will allow for comparison of brain regions and correlate proteomic with metabolomic datasets.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Number of proteins detected in each sample per ROI of tissue by nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS. Proteomic differences among rat brain regions were first compared by utilizing principal component analysis (PCA) which is an unsupervised algorithm that transforms data into main principal components (PC) that explain the most variance in the data set. 41   Figure 4  represents the PCA plot that distinguished the analyzed brain ROIs with PC 1 and 2 which accounts for 36.9% and 20.0% of the variance in the dataset, respectively. It was clear from this plot that ROIs 1, 2, and 3 were closely clustered together with only mild separation. ROI 5 was separated from ROI 1, 2, and 3 by differences in PC2 while ROI 4 was clearly separated from all brain ROIs by both PC1 and PC2. This initial data indicated that ROI 4 (corpus callosum) had the most significant proteomic differences compared to the other brain ROIs analyzed.   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Principal component analysis of proteomic data grouped together by each region of the brain analyzed by nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS. Changes in protein abundances between the five brain ROIs were also compared. To visualize these changes, a heatmap of protein abundances was created ( Figure 5 ). Protein abundances were scaled by a z-score transformation, representing the number of standard deviations from the mean value. Red values represent proteins higher than the average abundance while green values represent proteins lower than the average protein abundance. Clear differences in proteomic makeup were visible between the analyzed brain ROIs. ROI 4 of the brain exhibited the most differences compared to the other brain regions. A clear observation of proteins elevated in ROI 4 relative to other regions is highlighted in  Figure 5  with a dotted white rectangle. Highlighted with a dotted orange rectangle are clusters of proteins with much lower than average abundance in ROI 4 but higher than average abundance in other brain regions. The protein abundances in the heatmap were also clustered together using hierarchical clustering (clustered by proteins (left) and by brain region (top)). This clustering also distinguishes ROI 4 (corpus callosum) as clearly different from the other brain regions.   Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Heatmap of protein abundances in each region hierarchically clustered together by abundance. Abundances are transformed with a z-score transformation where red values represent abundances higher than the mean protein abundance and green values represent abundances lower than the mean protein abundance. Volcano plots allow easy identification of statistically significant proteins by plotting a fold change versus p-value between two variables for each individual protein. Proteomic differences between each individual brain region were compared by visualizing volcano plots.  Figure 6  shows all volcano plots comparing each ROI against each other in which significant proteins are highlighted by red/green boxes and represent proteins with a significant fold change (0.5<FC>2) and a p-value less than 0.05. Comparison of ROIs excluding ROI 4 ( Figure 6, A – F ) revealed a difference of 29–73 proteins significantly changing between each of these brain regions. Each sample is likely to have some significant differentially expressed proteins as these samples represent distinct biological regions of the brain. Interestingly, investigation of volcano plots comparing ROI 4 to other regions had strikingly obvious differences in the proteomic data ( Figure 6, G – J ). More than 225 proteins were found to be significantly more or less abundant in ROI 4 compared to the other analyzed regions of the brain. This is a 5x increase in average number of significant proteins compared between ROI 4 and other analyzed regions of the brain.   Figure 6.     Open in a new tab   Volcano plots of proteins comparing each individual brain region against the other analyzed regions of the brain. Proteins located in the red/green highlighted boxes represent proteins with a statistically significant difference between the two regions with the values in the top left and right corner indicating the amount of proteins in those regions.  A-F)  Volcano plots comparing regions not including ROI 4.  G-J)  Volcano plots comparing ROI 4 against other analyzed brain regions show that ROI 4 exhibits a significant proteomic difference indicated by the significant increase in the amount of proteins that are significantly higher/lower abundant in ROI 4 compared to other analyzed regions of the brain. The complementary data represented here indicates that a multimodal MSI technique with these two platforms is achievable, so direct correlations between the datasets were then investigated to dig deeper into the datasets. A multiomic pathway integration was achieved by searching for pathways in KEGG for the  Rattus norvergicus  species for which both reactant and product metabolites were detected in the IR-MALDESI dataset for a particular enzyme detected by nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS.  Figure 7  shows an example of this multiomic pathway integration approach. IR-MALDESI-MSI detected dihydrothymine which metabolizes to ureidoisobutyrate by dihydropyrimindinase (detected by nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS). The metabolites are represented by ion image heatmaps and the enzyme is represented by a bar graph showing the grouped abundance in each ROI. The average abundances of ureidoisobutyrate were calculated in each ROI of the IR-MALDESI data and plotted against the grouped abundance of dihydropyrimindinase to create a correlation plot. With each datapoint representing a ROI, this plot shows that these datasets were strongly correlated with each other (R 2 =0.9942, r=0.9971). Additional examples of multiomic integration between IR-MALDESI and nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS can be found in  Figure S1 .   Figure 7.     Open in a new tab   Multiomic pathway integration of IR-MALDESI and nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS. Ion images represent metabolites detected by IR-MALDESI in the rat brain and the bar graph represents the average abundance of the enzyme involved in this metabolism for each brain region. Correlation plot of the grouped abundance of enzyme versus the average abundance of metabolite in each region show a strong correlation between the two datasets. CONCLUSIONS   A multimodal mass spectrometry imaging approach was created by combining IR-MALDESI for metabolomic analysis with nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS for proteomic analysis. From two adjacent 12 μm rat brain sections, a significant amount of metabolomic and proteomic information was detected and utilized to gain the maximum molecular information from a biological specimen. These two platforms analyzed individually for separate molecular profiles revealed complementary information about the molecular profiles in the rat brain. Further investigation of metabolomic pathway analysis showed high correlation between the two techniques. This work represents preliminary investigations on combining two highly sensitive techniques for a multimodal mass spectrometry imaging workflow. Supplementary Material   Supplemental Material     NIHMS1872389-supplement-Supplemental_Material.docx  (1.3MB, docx)    Table S1     NIHMS1872389-supplement-Table_S1.xlsx  (79.5KB, xlsx)    Table S2     NIHMS1872389-supplement-Table_S2.xlsx  (1.1MB, xlsx)    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   IR-MALDESI-MSI measurements were carried out in the Molecular Education, Technology, and Research Innovation Center (METRIC) at North Carolina State University. The authors would like to thank Dr. Jeffrey Enders for his guidance and help on processing proteomics data in Proteome Discoverer as well as Dr. Heather Patisaul for contribution of rat brain tissue. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from the National Institutes of Health (R01GM087964 and R01GM138931) and North Carolina State University. Footnotes     SUPPORTING INFORMATION   Additional examples about multiomic integration ( Figure S1 ); Metabolites putatively annotated by IR-MALDESI with significant fold changes between ROI 4 ( Table S1.xlsx ); Proteins identified in the rat brain by nanoPOTS-LC-MS/MS by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (