>Materials and methods   Database access   Although both the HMDB and KEGG databases are publically accessible from web interfaces, local copies of the databases were needed for our analyses. The HMDB database was downloaded directly as a single SDfile (.sdf) file (i.e., flat file of concatenated molfile files with additional structured information) from the HMDB website. Like many sources of molfile files, the most recent versions of the HMDB contain additional structural and chemical information in each molfile file that is not specified in the original V3000 molfile file specification; therefore we developed a Perl script to handle these standard deviations from the molfile file specifications and create a specification compliant version. As the KEGG Ligand database is not available for download in any consolidated format, we developed a Python program that takes advantage of the KEGG REST interface to download molfile files (or kcf files) for each entry in the database and then concatenate them into a local copy of the KEGG database. The molfile files for KEGG entries do not contain database IDs nor compound names; these were collected from the KEGG database via its REST interface and added to the appropriate molfile file by our Python program.   Because we could not find a current functional group database that fit our particular design criteria (ability to specify both wild-carded and contextual atoms) (Kotera et al.,  2008 ; Haider,  2010a , b ; Eustis,  2011 ), we created one from scratch. To provide the same functionality as the existing CheckMol program, the list of functional groups detected by CheckMol was a natural starting point. For each functional group, the structure of the functional group was drawn by hand in JChem and the structures saved as molfile files. The molfile format designates each atom as a particular element. Therefore, we have developed a new nomenclature for describing these conditions. To designate that a particular atom could be one of several element types, the element type is designated as a list of possible element types separated by “|” while an “!” before an element type specifies the element type can be any element except the specified one (Figure  2 ). For example, “H|O|N” as an element type would specify that the atom could be hydrogen, oxygen or nitrogen while “!H” specifies that the element type can be any element type other than hydrogen. These descriptive facilities are more powerful than simple wild-carded “ * ” descriptive facilities available in other chemoinformatics tools (Daylight Chemical Information Systems,  2008 ).   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Example functional group molfile files. (A)  The functional group molfile file for acyl fluoride demonstrates the use of the !X element type. The !H element type for atom 2 designates that it can be validly mapped to any non-hydrogen element type atom.  (B)  Similar to acyl fluoride, acyl halide uses the !H to designate a non-hydrogen element type. Additionally, since the halogen component of an acyl halide can be any halogen, the element type for the halogen atom is designated using the X|Y element type.  (C)  A typical functional molfile file. ( D)  The ketone carbonyl functional group uses contextual atoms to prevent matching of the molfile files to carbonyl-containing moieties that are not ketones. Furthermore, to allow searching for a specific chemical substructure (e.g., −C=O or carbonyl) in particular chemical contexts (e.g., aldehydes or ketones), a way to designate atoms as “contextual” was added. Contextual atoms are designated with an asterisk after the element type and must be matched for a chemical substructure but are not considered as part of the substructure. For example, “C * ” indicates a required element type of carbon that is not counted as part of the chemical substructure (Figure  2 ), for example, to distinguish between ketone and aldehyde carbonyls. To identify ketone carbonyls exclusively, the two carbon atoms bonded to the ketone carbonyl carbon atom are designated as contextual and therefore must be matched for the ketone carbonyl to be recognized but are not considered as part of the ketone carbonyl substructure. As a result, the carbonyl of an aldehyde, which is bonded to C and H, would not be recognized. The ability to designate contextual atoms in our chemical substructure descriptions is one of the main differences from previously published chemoinformatics toolkits that have substructure detection facilities. For example, while SMARTS allows for wild-carded atom designation (Daylight Chemical Information Systems,  2008 ) it does not allow for the designation of contextual atoms. This ability allows CASS to cleanly determine which atoms overlap between functional groups.   The functional group molfile files were concatenated to form a flat database similar to the downloaded copies of KEGG and the HMDB. Since flat files themselves provide no efficient means of searching for a particular entry and therefore must be parsed in their entirety, SQLite versions of these flat database files were created, to enable indexed entry retrieval. SQLite retains the simplicity and portability of flat files while offering the ability to search for entries in an efficient manner. Additionally, tools written in Perl were created to add a new entry to a SQLite database from a molfile file, return a particular molfile file from a database, and to check if a given entry exists in the database. Molfile parsers   While molfile files accurately store chemical structures in a human-readable format, the structure of the molfile file format does not lend itself to computer manipulation and thus a more computer friendly internal format was needed. Toward this end, a molfile file parser was developed to convert molfile files into an internal representation shared among all of the programs. Due to differences between the formatting of KEGG and HMDB molfile files, different parsing methods are required for each database molfile file. Our parser can handle the molfile file variants used in both KEGG and HMDB as well as the proprietary.kcf format used in KEGG. This parser also handles the modified molfile file format used in our functional group molfile files via a parameter passed to the parser.   Regardless of the origin of the input molfile file, the final data structure generated by the parser is the same, a “molecule” object consisting of multiple data members representing different constituents and properties of a molecule. For each atom in the molfile file, an “atom” object data member is created that contains the element type, number of bonds to the atom, the sum of the bond order of all bonds to the atom and the index of the atom, which is its order in the list of atoms in the molfile file. Similarly, each bond has a corresponding “bond” object data member containing the indices of the two atoms it bonds and the order of the bond. Additionally, the molecule object contains the compound's database ID and name, a mathematical representation of its bonded structure, and optionally, a string representation of the molfile file from which it was generated.   In many database molfile files, implicit hydrogens are often excluded to reduce the size of the files. These implicit hydrogens must be added to the internal representation of each compound as the hydrogens could be included in a functional group of interest. We used standard molecular connectivity and valence methods to add the missing hydrogens (Weininger,  1988 ). This procedure does not account for pH or pK in these calculations and hydrogens are added to produce non-charged molecules unless the molfile file specifies otherwise (i.e., species that barely exist in practice). This procedure was validated by comparing known formulae for database compounds to computed formulae following hydrogen addition. Owing to the deviation of KEGG and HMDB molfile files from the molfile file standard, preexisting packages for manipulating molfile files could not be used and our own tool had to be created. These new tools add a variety of features in addition to adding implicit hydrogens and they support non-standard molfile files and KEGG compound files (.kcf), a molfile file derived file format used throughout the KEGG database. Adjacency matrix representations   In order to use the graph theory algorithms in our substructure search program, numerical representations of each database's chemical structure are needed. The two common options for storing graph-like structures are adjacency lists and adjacency matrices. Although the list representation requires less memory than an adjacency matrix, matrices allow for direct testing of isomorphisms using very quick matrix comparisons and multiplication. In an adjacency matrix, each row and column corresponds to a specific node in a graph, or in this instance, an atom in a molecule (see Figure  3 ). The assignment of row or column to atom is done using the index of the atom. Row and column N is mapped to the atom with index N, therefore the first row and column both represent the first atom, the second row and column the second atom and so on. The value for an element ( i,j ) of the adjacency matrix corresponds to the presence or absence of a vertex connecting the two nodes, which correspond to chemical bonds between atoms. If the value of  i,j  is zero, no bond exists between the atoms.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Flowchart of major steps and representations needed by a chemical substructure search algorithm . Chemical structures of a specific compound and functional group are treated as colored graphs that are converted into adjacency matrices with elements identified along the diagonal. A mapping matrix ( M ) represents possible translations of specific atoms between the compound and functional group. The mapping matrix is searched for specific isomorphic mappings of the functional group mapped completely onto the compound chemical structure. To construct an adjacency matrix for a molecule with N atoms, our program first creates an N × N square matrix ( A ) with all  A i,j  equal to zero. This saves a significant amount of time constructing the matrix as the entire matrix object is initialized at once and memory is already allocated for it. Second, as molecular graphs are often sparse (i.e., the number of possible vertices is much smaller than the maximum possible number of vertices), most of the values of  A i,j  will be equal to zero. Thirdly, such a matrix can be created very efficiently utilizing functional programming methods which are heavily optimized in Perl. Not all values of  A i,j  can remain zero, so for each bond object, the indices of the bonded atoms are retrieved along with the bond order and the corresponding values of  A i,j  and  A j,I  (as bonds are mutual) are set equal to the bond order. For example after processing, a double bond between atoms 2 and 4,  A 2,4  = 2 and  A 4,2  = 2. Once the adjacency matrix is constructed, they are stored as an object data member within the molecule object. Substructure searching   After the adjacency matrices for both the database compounds and the functional groups are constructed, our algorithm searches for isomorphic functional group substructures within the database compounds. The starting point for our algorithmic development was the Ullman algorithm (Ullmann,  1976 ). Owing to the presence of numerous “goto” statements in the original pseudocode, we converted this pseudo code into a control flow diagram (Figures  4A,B ) and then into a modern control flow pseudocode representation (Figures  5A,B ). We then deviated significantly from this new pseudocode representation during the development of our algorithm.   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Pseudocode and control flow diagram of the original Ullmann simple enumeration algorithm. (A)  The original pseudocode for the Ullmann simple enumeration algorithm. The symbol “:=” was used in the original algorithm to denote assignment (e.g., d := d + 1 means “set d equal to d + 1”).  (B)  Control flow diagram generated from the original published 7-step Ullmann enumeration algorithm pseudocode due to the presence of numerous “goto” statements. Although “goto” statements still exist in some programming language, their use are highly discouraged in modern programming style in order to prevent errors and to improve both the readability and the maintainability of computer programs. The “goto” statements are represented by blue lines in the control flow structure. The variable SKIP2B was added and maps to no variable in the original algorithm, it is for control flow purposes only. Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Modernized pseudocode and control flow diagram of the Ullmann algorithm. (A)  Modern Ullmann algorithm pseudocode produced from the control flow diagram with variables renamed to promote readability of the pseudocode. While converting the control flow diagram to the pseudocode, we noticed a typographical error in original published algorithmic pseudocode (line 2, step 7, in the simple enumeration algorithm on page 33 of the original publication), which we assume has been either overlooked or ignored since its publication. This line is marked † in the pseudocode above.  (B)  Control flow diagram of the modernized Ullmann algorithm. Given two graphs  G A  and  G B  representing the structure of a database molecule A and a functional group or a generic substructure query B and their corresponding adjacency matrices  A A  and  A B , the first step in both algorithms is the creation of a mapping matrix  M  (see Figure  3 ) with dimension b × a, where a and b are the number of atoms in A and B, respectively. It should be noted that a > b, as B must have fewer atoms than A, in order to be a subgraph of A. Each element of  M  is then assigned a value of 1 or 0. If  M i,j  = 1, the atom with index i in B can be “validly mapped” to the atom with index j in A and if  M i,j  = 0, no valid mapping can exist between the two atoms. In the traditional Ullmann algorithm, the definition of a valid mapping was determined by the number of vertices to the two nodes, i.e., valid mappings can only exist when the number of vertices to the jth point in A is greater than or equal to the degree of the ith point of B. Thus, the number of vertices “colors” the node and valid mappings are only allowed between nodes with the same or appropriate “color.” Expressed in chemical terms, the jth atom in A must have an equal or greater number of bonds as the ith atom in B. By expanding the parameters that constitute a valid mapping, the total number of possible mappings that have to be tested can be minimized. In our algorithm, the element types of the two atoms are compared as well, set the corresponding  M i,j  equal to zero ( M i,j  = 0), if the element types do not match. Here our expanded element types used in the functional group molfile files is important, as !X could map to an atom not element X ( M i,j  = 1), X|Y|Z could map to an atom of element type X, Y, or Z ( M i,j  = 1). As we are searching for complete instances of the functional group B as a substructure of A, every atom in B must have at least one valid potential mapping to an element in A. Therefore, if an entire row of  M  contains zeroes, no isomorphism can exist for that functional group-database compound pair as there is an atom with no possible valid mapping.   Since  M  represents simultaneously all possible mappings, not individual mappings of functional group atoms to database compound atoms,  M  must be searched to find specific mapping matrices  M'  for each mapping of all functional group atoms to particular database atoms (Figure  3 ). Thus, a comprehensive search of  M  enumerates all  M'  and the computational speed of searching  M  is highly correlated to the number of “1” elements in  M , which we call the “possible node mapping count” ( m  = ∑  M i,j ). Now, the Ullmann algorithm directly searches  M  in a depth-first manner; this involves copying and modifying large two-dimensional matrices frequently to enumerate all  M' . Our algorithm avoids these costly operations by keeping track of the enumeration process with two one-dimensional integer vectors,  v  and  u . | v | is equal to the number of atoms in B and  v  records which atoms in B are mapped to atoms in A at any stage of the enumeration. The index of the element in  v  corresponds to the index of the atom of B and the value of  v [ i ] the index of the atom in A to which it is mapped; so the value  v [2] = 3 denotes that atom two in B is currently mapped to atom three in A. Before any value  v [ i ] =  j  is assigned, we check that  M i,j  = 1, so that the mapping stored in  v  is potentially valid. To denote an unmatched atom in B, the corresponding element of  v  is set equal to −1. Since  v  stores the same information as  M'  in the Ullmann algorithm, we can skip explicitly calculating  M'  all together saving both time and memory. In circumstances where knowing the existence of a valid mapping is sufficient, once a valid mapping is detected the algorithm can return the valid mapping and terminate. When applicable, this short-circuiting has the potential to substantially improve performance when the number of possible valid mappings is very large or the likelihood of finding a valid mapping early in the enumeration process is high (see  Figure 7A ). | u | is equal to the number of atoms in A and the elements in  u  indicate if a corresponding atom in A has been used in previously detected valid isomorphisms and should therefore be excluded from further enumeration. The index of a value in  u  represents the atom with the same index in A and the value of  u [ i ] is either zero or one, representing if the column is non-excluded or excluded, respectively. The pseudocode for our enumeration method is shown in Figure  6 .   Figure 6.     Open in a new tab   Pseudocode and control flow diagram of the CASS algorithm. (A)  Pseudocode for CASS. In this algorithm, matrices are neither copied nor modified, saving considerable computational time and memory. Also, the control flow is cleaner than in the modernized Ullmann algorithm pseudocode. Additionally, our short-circuiting method in the line marked † allows the algorithm to terminate early when a valid mapping has been identified. This allows for time savings when knowing that a single valid mapping exists is sufficient and the number of valid mappings is not needed (e.g., stereoisomerism detection). Also, partial invalid mappings allow additional short-circuiting to take place in the line marked Δ, since the algorithm is finding subgraphs in graph A that are isomorphic to graph B.  (B)  A control flow diagram of CASS. Each  M'  generated by the Ullmann algorithm contains only one “1” per row and represents a particular mapping of the atoms, which must be checked to confirm if it is a valid isomorphism. The Ullmann algorithm checks for isomorphism by comparing a matrix  C  to  A B ,  where  C  =  M' ( M'A A ) T ., An isomorphism is found if it is true that (∀ i,  ∀ j)  where ( A Bi,j  = 1) then ( C i,j  = 1). In our algorithm, we circumvent the calculation of  C  by directly comparing  A A  and  A B  using the information stored in  v . If (∀ 0 ≤  i  ≤ | v |, ∀ 0 ≤  j  ≤ | v |) ( A B i,j  =  A Av[i],v[j] ), then  v  represents a valid isomorphism and a copy of  v  denoted as  v'  is stored in a list of isomorphisms. Once an atom in the functional group has been discovered in a valid isomorphism, the corresponding element in  u  is set to one to exclude that atom from additional enumeration. Additionally, values in  u  can be given as input to the enumerator to prevent mappings to those atoms. This is useful in excluding database compound atoms from searches or to import information concerning previously detected chemical substructure.   After all functional group-database compound pairs are checked for potential isomorphisms, it must be determined if these isomorphisms overlap one another or are subgraphs of one another. These conditions can be determined quickly by comparing the saved  v'  from each identified isomorphism. Consider two functional group isomorphisms E and F and their corresponding mapping vectors  v E  and  v F . First corresponding sets are constructed from each vector and the values with indices corresponding to context-only atoms are removed: V E  = { v E [ i ]| i  is not the index of a context only atom in E} and V F  = { v F [ i ]| i  is not the index of a context only atom in F}. With these sets constructed, the vertices shared by E and F is simply the set O = V E  ∩ V F  and the relationship between E and F can be determined by comparing O to V E  and V F . If O = Ø, the two sets are disjoint and therefore E and F do not overlap. If |O| = |V E | = |V F |, the indices shared are identical and E and F represent mirror images of the same substructure. If |O| = |V E  | and O != Ø then E completely overlaps with F and E is a subgraph of F. If |O| = |V F  | and O != Ø then F completely overlaps with and is a subgraph of E. Else, |O| < |V F  | and |O| < |V E  | and O != Ø E and F overlap but neither is a subgraph of the other. This allows the program to differentiate functional groups that exist as a subgraph of other functional groups from those that do not and allow for proper counting of functional groups that are mirror images. Functional groups that are determined to be a subgraph of another functional group (conditions 2 and 3) have “subgraph” appended to their name. Functional groups that are overlapping but neither is a subgraph of the other (condition 4), both functional groups have “overlapping” appended to their name. For example, the hydroxyl group of a carboxylic acid would be designated a “subgraph-hydroxyl” while the carboxylic acid would be designated simply as “carboxylic acid.” Additionally mirror image functional groups such as anhydrides, match twice, and this must be accounted for in order to arrive at the proper number of instances of such substructures. This comparison is conducted for all functional group pairings and once complete, the name and number of functional groups is appended to the molecular formula to generate an “extended formula.” For example, if only ketones were searched for, the extended formula for acetone would be C 3 H 6 O 1 Ketone 1 . Functional groups can also be marked as “super” functional groups. These groups are excluded from the subgraph and inclusive designations and are used for functional groups that match a large number of other functional groups in the database or are a subgraph of many other functional groups. Alkyl halide is such a “super” functional group as it matches alkyl chloride, fluoride, iodide, and bromide; if not marked super, all instances of alkyl chloride for instances would be overlapping with alkyl halide.   In addition to searching for functional groups, CASS can also be configured to search for potential stereoisomerism between database compounds. First, all database compound pairings between database entries with the same molecular formula or extended molecular formula are identified. Searching by extended formula can greatly decrease the number of non-stereoisomeric pairing that must be tested as stereoisomers will contain the same functional groups in addition to having the same formula while other types of isomers may not. When searching for stereoisomers the same process as used for functional groups is utilized except that compounds A and B are the database compounds being tested. As our adjacency matrices