>Materials and Methods   Ethics Approval   All methods aimed to minimize the suffering of experimental animals were performed in accordance with the animal ethics guidelines and approved by the Ethics Board of China Medical University. The approval number of this animal research was IACUC-001-13. Cell Lines and Experimental Animals   PANC-1, human PC cell lines, were ordered from the Institute of Cell Biology of Chinese Academy of Sciences. The cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (DMEM), which was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, L-glutamine (2 mmol/L), penicillin G (100 U/mL), and streptomycin (0.1 mg/mL) in an incubator (37 °C, 5% CO 2 , and 95% humidity). The experimental animals were female BALB/c nude mice aged 4 to 6 weeks and weighing 18 to 22 g. Facilities: SPF barrier environment and IVC cage feeding. Feed: Pellet feed, Jiangsu Synergetic Pharmaceutical Bioengineering Co., Ltd. Drinking water: Sterile water. Feeding density: 6 animals per cage. Cage change frequency: twice a week. Fasting: N/A. Special feeding: N/A. Rich environment: make nest paper or toys. Reagents and Equipment   The reagents used were as follows: Acetonitrile (Merck KGaA); 30% Acr-Bos (29:1) (Biyuntian); Anti-β Actin antibodies (Abcam ab8226 1:2000); Anti-CD82 antibodies (Abcam ab109529 1:1000); Ammonium formate (Thermo Fisher); Ammonium persulfate (Merck KGaA); BCA test kit (Biyuntian); Bovine serum albumin (LABLEAD); Dichloromethane (Thermo Fisher); DMEM (GE Healthcare Life Sciences); Electrochemiluminescence (ECL) (Thermo Fisher); ExoIII Buffer (Thermo Fisher); Fast Digest Buffer, Fast Digest xhoI, Fast Digest HindIII (Thermo Fisher); Formic acid (Merck KGaA); Gel Recovery Kit 28706 (QIAGEN); Goat anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo 31340 1:100 000-1:200 000) and Goat anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo 31460 1:100 000-1:200 000) (Thermo Fisher); Isopropyl alcohol (Merck KGaA); Lipofectamin 2000 (Thermo Fisher); Loading Buffer (Biyuntian); Methanol (Merck KGaA); Methyl tert-butyl ether (Merck KGaA); Tetramethylethylenediamine (Merck KGaA); Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher); Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Biyuntian); Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore); Standard reagent 12:0 Lyso PC, Cer(d18:1/4:0), PC (13:0/13:0), DG (12:0/12:0), TG (17:0/17:0/17:0) (Avanti/zzstandard); Tris-HCI, PH8.8 (Biyuntian), Tris-HCI, PH6.8 (Biyuntian); Total protein extraction kit (Biyuntian).   The equipments used were as follows: Ball mill instrument (MM400) (Retsch); Centrifugal concentrator (CentriVap); Centrifuge (5424R) (Eppendorf); Electronic balance (AS 60/220.R2) (RADWAG); Full wavelength scanning multifunction reading instrument (Thermo Fisher); HH.SII-1 Thermostat water bath (Chang‘an Scientific Instrument Factory); LC-MS/MS (ExionLC AD UPLC–QTRAP) (SCIEX); Tanon EPS 300 Electrophoresis apparatus (Tianeng Technology Co., Ltd); TGL-16G Table High Speed Centrifuge (Sihuan Scientific Instrument Factory); Ultrasonic cleaning apparatus (KQ5200E) (Kunshan Ultrasonic Instrument Co., Ltd); Vortex mixer (VORTEX-5) (Kyllin-Bell); TGL-16G Table High Speed Centrifuge (Sihuan Scientific Instrument Factory). PANC1-KAI1 Cell Line   The KAI1-PLV-EF1α-MCS-IRES-Puro vector was first constructed. The target gene fragment was amplified and purified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (reaction system: 50-100 mg of template, 2 μL of primer-F, 2 μL of primer-R, 25 μL of primer-STAR, deionized water to reach a volume of 50 μL; response procedures: 98 °C for 10 s, 55 °C for 15 s, 72 °C for 1 kb/min with 30 cycles). The PLV-EF1α-MCS-IRES-Puro vector was double-digested by Thermo Scientific FastDigest XhoI and Thermo Scientific FastDigest HindIII. Exonuclease III was used to connect the skeleton vector and the target fragment to construct the recombinant plasmid for transformation. PCR amplification of the KAI1/CD 82 -PLV-EF1α-MCS-IRES-Puro vector was detected by agarose gel electrophoresis.   Then, we constructed the PANC1 cell line stably expressing KAI1/CD 82 . The KAI1-PLV-EF1α-MCS-IRES-Puro vector was cotransfected with virus-packed plasmid pMDLg/pRRE, VSV-G, and pRSV-Rev into HEK293T cells using Lipofectamine 2000. The cells were cultured and collected after 48 and 72 h. PANC1 cells were infected after the 2 supernatants were mixed (the cell adherence rate was 70%). The number of positive fluorescent signals in cells was detected by flow cytometry to determine the infection rate of PANC1 cells by green fluorescent protein. Puro antibiotics (5 μg/mL) were added into monoclonal cells for screening. The expression of the KAI1/CD 82  protein was confirmed by Western blot. Nude Mouse Xenograft Model   PC Nude Mouse Model   The PANC1-KAI1/CD 82  cell line digested by trypsin was suspended with Hank's balanced salt solution (HBSS). The cell suspension of each strain was collected and cultured at a concentration of 1 × 10 7  cells/mL and was inoculated in situ into the pancreas of nude mice with 0.1 mL of each cell. Successful injection was indicated by the presence of liquid blisters under the subcapsular region of the pancreas without any liquid exposure, and the abdominal wound was sutured. The principle of aseptic operation should be strictly observed during the surgical operation. After waking up under anesthesia, the mice were placed in an SPF grade feeding chamber. After 5 weeks, the mice were sacrificed, and their serum samples were collected and measured. Nude Mouse Model of Splenic Injection Liver Metastasis   The PANC1-KAI1/CD 82  cell line digested by trypsin was suspended with HBSS. The cell suspension of each strain was collected and cultured at a concentration of 1 × 10 7  cells/mL and was inoculated into the spleen of nude mice with 0.1 mL of each cell. After injection, a 75% alcohol cotton ball was used to compress the pinhole for 1 to 2 min. Care was taken to stop bleeding in order to prevent cancer cell extravasation and implantation metastasis in the abdominal cavity. Subsequently, the wound was sutured. Successful injection was marked by subcapsular fluid blisters and no fluid exposure. The principle of aseptic operation should be strictly observed during the surgical operation. After waking up under anesthesia, the mice were placed in an SPF grade feeding chamber. After 5 weeks, the mice were sacrificed, and their serum samples were collected and measured. Blood Sample Extraction   Methods for extraction of hydrophilic compounds   The sample was thawed on ice, vortexed for 10 s, and mixed well. About 300 μL of pure methanol was added to 50 μL of serum. The mixture was vortexed for 3 min and centrifuged at 12 000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min. Then, the supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 12 000 rpm at 4 °C for 5 min. The sample was placed in a refrigerator at −20 °C for 30 min and then centrifuged at 12 000 rpm at 4 °C for 3 min. Finally, 150 μL of the supernatant in the liner of the corresponding injection bottle was taken for on-board analysis. Methods for extraction of hydrophobic compounds   The sample was thawed on ice, vortexed for 10 s, and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm at 4 °C for 5 min. About 50 μL of 1 sample was taken and homogenized with 1 mL mixture comprising methanol, MTBE, and internal standard mixture. The mixture was vortexed for 15 min. Then, 200 μL of water was added, and the mixture was vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at 12 000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min. About 500 μL of supernatant was extracted and concentrated. The powder was dissolved with 200 μL of mobile phase B and then stored at −80 °C. Finally, the dissolving solution was transferred into the sample bottle for LC-MS/MS analysis. UPLC Conditions   UPLC Conditions of Hydrophilic Compounds   The sample extracts were analyzed using an LC-ESI-MS/MS system (UPLC, ExionLC AD,  https://sciex.com.cn/ ; MS, QTRAP® System,  https://sciex.com/ ). The analytical conditions were as follows: UPLC: column, Waters ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 C18 (1.8 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm); column temperature, 40 °C; flow rate, 0.4 mL/min; injection volume, 2 μL; solvent system, water (0.1% formic acid): acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid); gradient program, 95:5 V/V at 0 min, 10:90 V/V at 11.0 min, 10:90 V/V at 12.0 min, 95:5 V/V at 12.1 min, and 95:5 V/V at 14.0 min. UPLC Conditions of Hydrophobic Compounds   The sample extracts were analyzed using an LC-ESI-MS/MS system (UPLC, ExionLC AD,  https://sciex.com.cn/ ; MS, QTRAP® System,  https://sciex.com/ ). The analytical conditions were as follows: UPLC: column, Thermo Accucore™ C30 (2.6 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm i.d.); solvent system, A: acetonitrile/water (60/40, V/V, 0.1% formic acid, 10 mmol/L ammonium formate), B: acetonitrile/isopropanol (10/90 V/V, 0.1% formic acid, 10 mmol/L ammonium formate); gradient program, A/B (80:20, V/V) at 0 min, 70:30 V/V at 2.0 min, 40:60 V/V at 4 min, 15:85 V/V at 9 min, 10:90 V/V at 14 min, 5:95 V/V at 15.5 min, 5:95 V/V at 17.3 min, 80:20 V/V at 17.3 min, 80:20 V/V at 20 min; flow rate, 0.35 mL/min; temperature, 45 °C; injection volume: 2 μL. The effluent was alternatively connected to an ESI-triple quadrupole-linear ion trap (QTRAP)-MS. ESI-Q TRAP-MS/MS   ESI-Q TRAP-MS/MS of Hydrophilic Compounds   LIT and triple quadrupole (QQQ) scans were acquired on a triple quadrupole-linear ion trap mass spectrometer (QTRAP, QTRAP® LC-MS/MS System) equipped with an ESI TurboIonSpray interface, operating in positive and negative ion mode, and controlled by Analyst 1.6.3 software (Sciex). The ESI source operation parameters were as follows: source temperature 500 °C; ion spray voltage (IS) 5500 V (positive), −4500 V (negative); ion source gas I (GSI), gas II (GSII), and curtain gas (CUR) were set at 55, 60, and 25.0 psi, respectively; the collision gas (CAD) was high. Instrument tuning and mass calibration were performed with 10 and 100 μmol/L polypropylene glycol solutions in QQQ and LIT modes, respectively. A specific set of MRM transitions was monitored for each period according to the metabolites eluted within this period. ESI-Q TRAP-MS/MS of Hydrophobic Compounds   LIT and QQQ scans were acquired on a QTRAP® LC-MS/MS System equipped with an ESI TurboIonSpray interface, operating in positive and negative ion mode, and controlled by Analyst 1.6.3 software (Sciex). The ESI source operation parameters were as follows: ion source, turbo spray; source temperature 500 °C; ion spray voltage (IS) 5500 V(positive), −4500 V(negative); ion source gas 1 (GS1), gas 2 (GS2), and curtain gas (CUR) were set at 45, 55, and 35 psi, respectively; the collision gas (CAD) was medium. Instrument tuning and mass calibration were performed with 10 and 100 μmol/L polypropylene glycol solutions in QQQ and LIT modes, respectively. QQQ scans were acquired as MRM experiments with collision gas (nitrogen) set to 5 psi. DP and CE for individual MRM transitions were performed with further DP and CE optimization. A specific set of MRM transitions was monitored for each period according to the metabolites eluted within this period. Data Analysis   Principal Component Analysis   Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) was performed by statistics function prcomp within R ( www.r-project.org ). The data were unit variance scaled before unsupervised PCA. Hierarchical Cluster Analysis and Pearson Correlation Coefficients   The hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) results of samples and metabolites were presented as heatmaps with dendrograms, whereas the Pearson correlation coefficients (PCCs) between samples were calculated by the cor function in R and presented only as heatmaps. Both HCA and PCC were carried out by R package ComplexHeatmap. For HCA, the normalized signal intensities of metabolites (unit variance scaling) were visualized as a color spectrum. Selection of Differential Metabolites   The significantly regulated metabolites between groups were determined by variable importance in projection (VIP) ≥1 and absolute Log2 FC  (fold change) ≥1. VIP values were extracted from orthogonal partial least squares discrimination analysis (OPLS-DA) result, which also contain score plots and permutation plots, generated using R package MetaboAnalystR. The data were log transformed (log2) and subjected to mean centering before OPLS-DA. A permutation test (200 permutations) was performed to avoid overfitting. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes Annotation and Enrichment Analysis   The identified metabolites were annotated using Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) compound database ( http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/compound/ ). The annotated metabolites were then mapped to the KEGG Pathway database ( http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/pathway.html ). Significantly enriched pathways were identified with a hypergeometric test's  P -value for a given list of metabolites. Western Blot   First, 10% separation gel and 4% stacking gel were configured. Second, 5 to 20 μg of protein were loaded. When the strip was pressed into a line and reached the junction between the separation gel and the stacking gel, the voltage was adjusted to 110 V until the electrophoresis ended. Third, a PVDF membrane was cut according to the length of the sample. The PVDF membrane was activated in 100% methanol solution for 10 s and then balanced in the electrotransfer solution for 5 min. It is generally transferred by 300 mA for 1 to 3 h. Fourth, 5% skimmed milk was used for sealing for 1 h. Goat anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo 31340) was added: 1% to 5% skim milk powder or tris buffered saline tween (TBST) with diluted primary antibody, incubate overnight at 4 °C, and wash with TBST for 3 times (10 min each time). Goat anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo 31460) was added: 1% to 5% skim milk powder or TBST with diluted secondary antibody (1:100 000-1:200 000), incubate at room temperature for 1 h, and wash with TBST for 3 times (10 min each time). Finally, ECL was evenly added on the PVDF membrane and gelatinized for several seconds after the reaction. Results   PANC1-KAI1 Cell Line   The PCR identification results of KAI1/CD 82  PLV-EF1α-positive bacterial solution are shown in  Figure 1a . The efficiency of PANC1 cell lentivirus infection is shown in  Figure 1b . The KAI1/CD 82  overexpression and Western blot results of stable conversion of PANC1 cell line are shown in  Figure 1c  and d. The Western blot results showed that the monoclonal cells after virus infection could stably overexpress KAI1/CD 82  after screening, which proved that the stable cell line had been successfully constructed. P12 cells had poor resuscitation; thus, P16 was finally selected for subsequent experiments.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Lentivirus packaging and nude mouse xenograft models. (a) Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) identification results of KAI1/CD 82  PLV-EF1α-positive bacterial solution. (b) Efficiency of PANC1 cell lentivirus infection. (c and d) Western blot of KAI1/CD 82  protein expression. (e) Three PC tissues of nude mouse models. (f) Three liver metastasis tissues of nude mouse models. Nude Mouse Xenograft Models   Three PC nude mouse models and 3 splenic injection liver metastasis nude mouse models survived and developed cancers ( Figure 1e  and f). UPLC-MS/MS-Based Full spectrum Metabolomics   Six serum samples of the 2 groups were used for full spectrum metabolomic analysis based on UPLC-MS/MS platform, including 3 KAI1/CD 82 -PC nude mouse models and 3 KAI1/CD 82 -liver metastasis nude mouse models. The flow chart of analysis is shown in  Figure 2 .   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Flow chart of metabolomic analysis. Statistical Analysis of Differentially Expressed Metabolites   PCA and OPLS-DA were utilized to evaluate the differences in the expression of tissue metabolites between groups. PCA is a multidimensional data statistical analysis method for unsupervised pattern recognition. A set of potentially correlated variables are converted into a set of linearly uncorrelated variables through orthogonal transformation. The converted variables are called principal components. PCA data processing principle: the original data is compressed into N principal components to describe the features of the original data set, PC1 represents the most obvious features in the multidimensional data matrix, PC2 represents the most significant features in the data matrix except PC1, PC3, …, PCN, and so on. PCA uses the built-in statistical PRCOMP function of R software ( www.r-project.org/ ) and sets the PRCOMP function parameter scale = True to represent the normalization of unit variance scaling on the data. PCA was performed on the samples (including the quality control samples) in order to preliminarily understand the total metabolic differences between the samples of each group and the degree of variation between the samples within the group. PCA results showed the tendency of metabolome separation among each group, indicating whether there was difference in metabolome between sample groups. PCA showed distinct clustering between different groups ( Figure 3a  to c), respectively. Although PCA is effective in extracting the main information, it is insensitive to the variables with small correlation which can be solved by partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA). PLS-DA is a multivariate statistical analysis method with supervised pattern recognition. Specifically, the components in independent variable  X  and dependent variable  Y  are extracted, respectively, and then the correlation between the components is calculated. Compared with PCA, PLS-DA can maximize the differentiation between groups and is conducive to the search for differential metabolites. Orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) combines the orthogonal signal correction and PLS-DA methods, which can decompose the information of  X  matrix into 2 kinds of information related to  Y  and unrelated to  Y  and screen the difference variables by removing the unrelated differences. The OPLS-DA score plot and OPLS-DA model validation are shown in  Figure 4a  and b.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the samples (including the quality control samples) in order to preliminarily understand the total metabolic differences between the samples of each group and the degree of variation between the samples within the group. (a) PCA 2D results of grouped metabolites. (b) PCA 3D results of grouped metabolites. (c) Explainable variation in the first 5 principal components of PCA. PCA showed a distinct clustering between groups. Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   OPLS-DA score plot. (a) OPLS-DA score plot. The abscissa is the difference between groups. The ordinate represents the score value of orthogonal components, and the ordinate direction shows the difference within the group. (b) OPLS-DA model validation. The prediction parameters of the evaluation model include R 2 X, R 2 Y, and Q 2 . R 2 X and R 2 Y, respectively, represent the interpretation rate of the established model to the  X  and  Y  matrix, and Q 2  represents the prediction ability of the model. The closer these 3 indicators are to 1, the more stable and reliable the model will be. Screening of Differential Metabolites   Metabonomics data has the characteristics of “high dimension and massive amount,” so it is necessary to combine univariate statistical analysis and multivariate statistical analysis and analyze the data from multiple perspectives according to the characteristics of the date and accurately mine the differential metabolites. Univariate statistical analysis methods include parametric test and nonparametric test. Multivariate statistical analysis methods include PCA, partial least square discriminant analysis, and so on. Based on the results of OPLS-DA, the VIP of the OPLS-DA model was analyzed based on the obtained multivariate data, and the metabolites of different varieties or tissues could be selected preliminarily. At the same time, the  P -value or fold change of univariate analysis can be combined to further screen out the differential metabolites. If there is no biological duplicate sample comparison, difference screening is performed according to fold change value. If there is biological duplication, fold change and VIP values of OPLS-DA model are combined to screen differential metabolites. The metabolites with fold change≥2 and fold change≤0.5 were selected. If the difference of metabolites between the control group and the experimental group is more than 2 times or less than 0.5, the difference is considered significant. If there is biological duplication in the sample grouping, metabolites VIP ≥ 1 are selected on the basis of the above. VIP value represents the influence intensity of corresponding metabolite differences in the classification discrimination of each group of samples in the model. Generally, VIP ≥ 1 is considered to have significant differences.  Figure 5a  shows the VIP values of differential metabolites. The red dots represent up-regulated, while the green dots represent downregulated metabolites. After qualitative and quantitative analysis of the detected metabolites, combined with the grouping situation of specific samples, the difference multiple changes of the quantitative information of metabolites in each group were compared.  Figure 5b  shows the results of metabolites whose changes rank first after log2 processing of the difference multiple in each group comparison. The results of differential metabolite screening are shown in  Table 1 .  Figure 6a  is the S-plot of OPLS-DA, where the abscissa represents the cocorrelation coefficient between principal components and metabolites, and the ordinate represents the correlation coefficient between principal components and metabolites. The closer the metabolites are to the upper right corner and the lower left corner, the more significant the difference is. The red dots indicate the VIP value of these metabolites is greater than or equal to 1. The green dots indicate a VIP value of less than 1 for these metabolites. The volcano plot provides a quick look at the differences in the levels of metabolites expressed in 2 (group) samples and the statistical significance of the differences.  Figure 6b  presents the metabolite volcano plot, which shows the difference in the metabolite expression level and the statistical significance. The fiddle chart is a combination of a box plot and