>Materials and Methods   Plant materials and samples   The seeds from  SlSAHH2  over-expressed (OE-5# and OE-6#) and wild-type (WT) plants were placed in a shaker (220 rpm, 25 °C) and agitated until the seed hypocotyls had clearly developed. Then the sprouting seeds were planted in moist and fertile soil, covered with cling film, and grown at 25 °C with a photoperiod of 16 h of light and 8 h of darkness. The cling film was removed after the seeds had germinated. The seedlings were watered every 3 days and tomato fruits were collected at the breaker stage (Br). Fruits that were the same size were taken and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. There were five biological replicates in the experiment. Experimental method   Each 50 mg sample was placed in a 2 mL centrifuge tube. A total of 400 µL of extraction solution (methanol:water = 4:1) was added to the tube, which also contained 0.02 mg/mL of internal standard (L-2-chlorophenyl alanine). The samples were then ground into a fine powder using a frozen tissue grinder at −10 °C for 6 min (50 Hz). The samples were cleaned using a temperature-controlled ultrasonic cleaner and freezing ultrasound at 5 °C for 30 min (40 kHz). After the ultrasound treatment, the samples were placed in a freezer at −20 °C for 30 min to precipitate the proteins. Then the samples were centrifuged at 4 °C for 15 min (13,000  g ) and the supernatant was taken for LC-MS analysis. LC-MS analysis   The UHPLC-Q Exactive system and ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) tandem Fourier transform mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were used for determination. The chromatographic column was an Acquity UPLC HSS T3 (100 mm × 2.1 mm i.d., 1.8 µm; Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA); mobile phase A, 95% water + 5% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid); mobile phase B, 47.5% acetonitrile + 47.5% isopropanol + 5% water (0.1% formic acid); flow rate, 0.40 mL/min; sample size, 2 μL, and column temperature, 40 °C. Mass spectrum conditions: the positive and negative ion scanning ionization method was used to collect mass spectrum signals respectively; the scan type was 70–1,050; the sheath gas flow rate was 40 arb; the auxiliary gas flow rate was 10 arb, the heating temperature was 400 °C; capillary temperature, 320 °C; positive spray voltage, 3,500 V; and negative spray voltage, −2,800 V. Quality control samples (QCs) were prepared by mixing extracts from all the samples in an equal volume of liquid. The volume of each QC was the same as that of the samples and treated and tested in the same way as the samples that were used for analysis. In the instrumental analysis process, one QC sample was inserted into every 5–15 analysis sample to investigate the stability of the whole detection process. Data processing and identification of metabolites   The raw data were inputted into the Progenesis QI metabolomics processing software (Waters) after baseline filtering, peak recognition, integration, retention time correction, and peak alignment and the resulting data matrix included the retention time, mass charge ratio, and peak intensity. The MS and MS/MS mass spectral information was matched to the HMDB ( http://www.hmdb.ca/ ), and the Metlin ( https://metlin.scripps.edu/ ) and Majorbio databases. Data derived from the databases after screening were uploaded onto the Majorbio cloud platform ( https://cloud.majorbio.com ) for analysis. The spectrum peak intensity of a sample was normalized using a combined normalization method. At the same time, variables with a relative standard deviation greater than 30% of the QC samples were deleted and a log10 transformation was performed to obtain the final data matrix for subsequent analysis. Differential metabolite analysis   A principal component analysis (PCA) and orthogonal least partial squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) were performed on the data matrix. In addition, Student’s t-test and a difference multiple analysis were also performed. The differential metabolites were identified using the variable important in projection (VIP) obtained from OPLS-DA model and the  P -value for Student’s t test. Metabolites with a VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05 were considered differential metabolites. A total metabolite classification map for the tomato fruit was obtained based on the superclass classification used by the HMDB. The functional annotations of metabolic pathways were identified using KEGG to determine the pathways corresponding to the differential metabolites. Results   Main metabolites in WT and transgenic tomato fruit   The tomato fruit development and ripening periods include the immature green stage, mature green stage, breaker color stage (Br), orange color stage, red color stage, and overripe stage ( Fig. 1A ). The Br stage is often used as a sign for ripening ( Chen, 2020 ). After analyzing tomato fruits at the Br stage using LC-MS, 733 metabolites were obtained from the primary and secondary mass spectrometry data ( File S1 ) and 547 metabolites in 12 categories were identified using the HMDB ( File S2 ). Among them, lipids and lipid molecules (41.13%) accounted for the largest proportion ( File S2 ,  Fig. 1B ).   Figure 1 . Overview of metabolic profiles of  SlSAHH2  overexpressed tomato and wild-type tomato.     Open in a new tab   (A) From the left to the right: the immature green stage (IMG), mature green stage (MG), breaker color stage (Br), orange color stage (O), red color stage (R) and overripe stage (OR). (B) Pie chart depicting the biochemical categories of the differential primary metabolites identified between  SlSAHH2  overexpressed tomato and wild-type tomato. (C) PLS-DA analysis of metabolites identified  SlSAHH2  overexpressed tomato and wild-type tomato. Equal volumes of the three varieties of tomato samples were mixed and used for quality control (MIX). A total of 15 samples were divided into three groups, corresponding to WT, OE-5# and OE-6#, and five replicated samples were within the 95% confidence interval. Therefore, all the samples were valid and the three tomato lines were mostly separate from each other ( Fig. 1C ). The PLS-DA analysis showed that the main components of metabolism in the WT, OE-5# and OE-6# lines were different. Differentially accumulated primary metabolites in WT and transgenic fruit   The PLS-DA analysis showed that all five WT and OE-5# replicates were uniformly distributed in the 95% confidence rings with no abnormal samples, therefore each group of five replicates was a valid sample ( Figs. 2A  and  2B ). The PLS-DA permutation test confirmed the results. The PLS-DA analysis showed that all five WT and OE-6# replicates were uniformly distributed in the 95% confidence rings with no abnormal samples; therefore each group of five replicates was a valid sample ( Figs. 2C  and  2D ). The permutation test showed that the PLS-DA analysis was accurate. The distance between the experimental and control groups indicated that there were differences in metabolites between the two groups.   Figure 2 . PLS-DA analysis of metabolites identified of  SlSAHH2  overexpressed tomato and wild-type tomato.     Open in a new tab   (A) Metabolites identified in OE-5# and WT  via  PLS-DA analysis. (B) The corresponding Permutation test of PLS-DA: R2 = (0, 0.9948), Q2 = (0, 0.079). (C) Metabolites identified in OE-6# and WT  via  PLS-DA analysis. (D) The corresponding Permutation test of PLS-DA: R2 = (0, 0.9647), Q2 = (0, 0.0617). Analysis of the different  SlSAHH2  metabolites in overexpressed tomato and WT tomato   The results showed that the variation trends for the differential metabolites between OE-5#  vs . WT and OE-6#  vs . WT were not identical. There were 103 different metabolites between OE-5# and WT, among which 58 red marked metabolites were up-regulated and 45 blue marked metabolites were down-regulated ( Fig. 3A  and  File S3 ). Based on the screening conditions of a VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05, 85 out of the 103 metabolites in OE-5#  vs . WT group could be classified in the HMDB ( File S4 ). The up-regulated metabolites included dehydrotomatine, L-serine and hesperetin, whereas the down-regulated metabolites included 4-ethylphenol, betaine aldehyde, and 3,4-dimethylstyrene. There were 63 different metabolites between OE-6# and WT, among which 58 red marked metabolites were up-regulated and five blue marked metabolites were down-regulated ( Fig. 3B  and  File S5 ). There were 63 different metabolites between OE-6# and WT, among which 43 could be classified in the HMDB ( File S6 ). The up-regulated metabolites included 1,3-dicaffeoylquinic acid, kaempferol, and gallic acid. The down-regulated metabolites included L-tryptophan and pisumionoside.   Figure 3 . Volcano plot and Venn diagram of the 733 metabolites identified.     Open in a new tab   (A) Differential metabolites were defined as metabolites with VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05 in OE-5# compared to WT. (B) Differential metabolites were defined as metabolites with VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05 in OE-6# compared to WT. (C) Based on a VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05, the number of common metabolites in the OE-5#  vs . WT and OE-6#  vs . WT groups was eight. (D) The fold changes in the these eight common metabolites between the two transgenic lines and WT. Based on a VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05, the number of compounds in the OE-5#  vs . WT and OE-6#  vs . WT comparison groups were 103 and 63, respectively. Among them, eight common metabolites were found in the two comparison groups, which were 2-aminomuconic acid semialdehyde, arginyl-aspartic acid, guanosine, cytosine, guanine, arginyl-glutamic acid, uracil, and L-tryptophan ( Fig 3C ). The fold changes in these eight common metabolites between the two transgenic lines and WT are shown in  Fig. 3D . Analysis of the  SlSAHH2  over-expression tomato and WT enrichment pathways   The KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of the significantly different metabolites, the differential metabolites up-regulated in the OE-5# and WT groups were enriched in 23 metabolic pathways ( File S7 ), including nine significant metabolic pathways ( P  < 0.05), namely ABC transporters, purine metabolism, pyrimidine metabolism, caffeine metabolism, valine, leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis, monobactam biosynthesis, glycine, serine and threonine metabolism, glycerophospholipid metabolism and aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis ( Fig. 4A ). The differential metabolites that were down-regulated in the OE-5# and WT groups were enriched in 11 metabolic pathways ( File S7 ), including six significant metabolic pathways ( P  < 0.05), namely glycine, serine and threonine metabolism, tyrosine metabolism, biosynthesis of various secondary metabolites-part 2, tryptophan metabolism, ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinone biosynthesis, and phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis ( Fig. 4B ). The differential metabolites that were up-regulated in the OE-6# and WT groups were enriched in 29 metabolic pathways ( File S8 ), including six significant metabolic pathways ( P  < 0.05), namely purine metabolism, aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, pyrimidine metabolism, ABC transporters, beta-alanine metabolism and tropane, piperidine and pyridine alkaloid biosynthesis ( Fig. 5A ). The differential metabolites that were down-regulated in the OE-6# and WT groups were enriched in six metabolic pathways ( File S8 ) and all six were significant metabolic pathways ( P  < 0.05), namely phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis, glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism, aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis; glucosinolate biosynthesis, biosynthesis of various secondary metabolites-part 2, and tryptophan metabolism ( Fig. 5B ).   Figure 4 . A total of 733 metabolites were identified by bubble diagrams.     Open in a new tab   (A) OE-5# and WT up-regulated metabolites enriched by KEGG into the pathway shown by bubble diagrams (VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05). (B) OE-5# and WT down-regulated metabolites enriched by KEGG into the pathway shown by bubble diagrams (VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05). Figure 5 . A total of 733 metabolites were identified by bubble diagrams.     Open in a new tab   (A) OE-6# and WT up-regulated metabolites enriched by KEGG into the pathway shown by bubble diagrams (VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05) (B) OE-6# and WT down-regulated metabolites enriched by KEGG into the pathway shown by bubble diagrams (VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05). Discussion   Metabolomics is a broad, sensitive, and practical approach and the analysis of plant phenotypes by differential metabolites is a commonly used method ( Patel et al., 2021 ).  Kissoudis et al. (2015)  studied the changes to the metabolites produced in tobacco plants that overexpressed glutathione S-transferases under salt stress. Protective metabolites, such as proline and trehalosaccharide, in the transgenic plants were present at higher concentrations under salt stress and the results showed that GmGSTU4 contributed to salt stress tolerance ( Kissoudis et al., 2015 ). In this study, different metabolites in tomato plants that overexpressed  SAHH2  compared to the WT tomatoes were compared to explore the early ripening mechanism in tomatoes that overexpressed  SAHH2 . The metabolites produced by transgenic and WT plants were screened by LC-MS non-targeted liquid chromatography metabolomics. A comparison of the superclass results using HMDB showed that the metabolites were divided into 12 classes. A PLS-DA analysis and other methods were used to analyze the differences between transgenic and WT plants. The upregulated metabolites between OE-5# and WT were mainly dehydrotomatine and L-serine. Dehydrotomatine and L-serine play key roles in tomato fruit development and ripening. Dehydrotomatine accumulates in tomato leaves, tomato flowers and ripe green fruits and has a defense effect against bacteria, fungi and insects ( Lee et al., 2019 ). Serine also increases during fruit ripening due to glycolysis ( Lee et al., 2010 ). The important upregulated metabolites between OE-6# and WT were 1,3-dicaffeoylquinic acid, kaempferol, and gallic acid. Kaempferol, and gallic acid are involved in maturation. For example, kaempferol contents have been shown to be highest at the ripening phase during grape development ( Fang, Tang & Huang, 2013 ) and gallic acid increased from the pink to red stages during mulberry ripening ( Saracoglu, 2018 ). The kaempferol compounds begin to accumulate in tomatoes during the color turning stage and the flavonoid content reaches a maximum at ripening ( Le Gall et al., 2003 ). Flavonoids act as ROS to scavenge antioxidants in type VI trichomes and flavonoid deficiency disrupts redox homeostasis and terpenoid biosynthesis in the glandular trichomes of tomato ( Sugimoto et al., 2022 ). In tomato fruits, the low levels of flavonoid related transcripts in the flesh means that flavonoids mainly accumulate in the peel ( Dal Cin et al., 2011 ;  Zhang et al., 2015 ).   In a previous study, LC-MS/MS was used to analyze the differential metabolites between tomato mature green and red ripe fruit and the results showed that there were 652 differential metabolites, including 361 up-regulated and 219 down-regulated metabolites. These metabolites may contribute to flavor accumulation in tomato ( Zuo et al., 2020 ). Among the 652 differential metabolites, three (guanosine, cytosine and L-tryptophan) out of the eight common metabolites in the OE-5# and WT and OE-6# and WT comparison groups were also identified in this study ( Zuo et al., 2020 ,  Fig. 3C ). This correlation explained the differences in fruit ripening period between transgenic and WT tomatoes at the metabolite level. Tryptophan has multiple functions in plants. For example, the first step in serotonin synthesis is the conversion of tryptophan into tryptamine by tryptophan decarboxylase ( Islam et al., 2016 ). Overexpression of the tryptophan decarboxylase gene ( SlTDC1 ) in tomato revealed the physiological roles of tryptophan decarboxylase and indicated the role of serotonin in ripening ( Tsunoda et al., 2021 ). Furthermore, changes to the pathways related to amino acid biosynthesis of L-tryptophan, L-valine, L-alanine, L-glutamic acid, L-leucine, L-histidine occurred in fruit at the mature green and red ripe stages ( Zuo et al., 2020 ).  Zuo et al. (2020)  also reported that the tryptophan content in the red ripe fruit was downregulated compared to mature green fruit. In this study, the tryptophan content in transgenic fruit (earlier ripening) was also downregulated, which was consistent with  Zuo et al. (2020)  ( Fig. 3D ).   In the cysteine and methionine metabolism pathway, SAH is hydrolyzed by SAHH to generate Hcy, which suggests that the Hcy in tomatoes overexpressing  SAHH2  is probably up-regulated. Generally, L-serine and Hcy produce L-cystathionine using cystathionine β-synthase ( Xu, Hu & Wang, 2017 ). L-serine in OE-5# and OE-6# was up-regulated compared to the WT ( Fig 6 ), which suggests that L-cystathionine was also up-regulated. At the same time, under the action of γ-lyase, L-cystathionine produces L-homocysteine, which means that L-homocysteine in transgenic fruit may be up-regulated compared to the WT. Furthermore, L-methionine is produced from L-homocysteine using methionine synthase, therefore L-methionine in transgenic fruit may also increase ( Shen, 2019 ). When combined with the trans-methylation pathway for methionine, S-adenosyl-L-methionine can be produced from L-methionine using methionine adenosine transferase. S-adenosyl-L-methionine can accelerate the production of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid and S-methyl-5′-thioadenosine using S-adenosine-l-methionine methionine adenosine lyase ( Avila et al., 2004 ;  Tang et al., 2008 ).   Figure 6 . The inferred metabolic mechanism of  SlSAHH2  promoting fruit ripening.     Open in a new tab The contents of the terminal chemical compounds hesperetin, kaempfrerol, and S-methyl-5-thioadenosine were all higher in the transgenic tomato fruit than in the WT fruit ( Fig 6 ). 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) is the precursor of ethylene synthesis and the up-regulation of ACC can reflect increases in ethylene in fruit ( Mou et al., 2020 ;  Xie, Ying & Ying, 2009 ). It has also been shown that ethylene promotes flavonoid synthesis ( Ni et al., 2020 ). The inferred increase in S-adenosyl-L-methionine content and the reported high ethylene level in transgenic fruit ( Yang et al., 2017 ) further clarify the metabolic mechanism underlying  SlSAHH2  promotion of fruit ripening. Conclusions   In this study, LC-MS non-targeted liquid chromatography metabolomics was used to screen the metabolites produced by  SlSAHH2 -overexpressed transgenic and WT tomato fruit at the Br stage. PLS-DA was then used to analyze whether there were any differences between the tomato lines. Based on the screening conditions: VIP > 1 and  P  < 0.05, 103 differential metabolites between tomato variety OE-5# and WT and 63 differential metabolites between OE-6# and WT were identified. Then, corresponding screening was conducted and the metabolites were labeled using the HMDB and KEGG database to obtain a total metabolite classification map for tomato. The L-serine, kaempferol, hesperidin, and other ripening related substances levels in overexpressed tomato were higher than those in WT tomato. The L-tryptophan content in the transgenic lines was lower than in the WT fruits, which was consistent with previous reports that its content decreased with fruit ripening. The results indicated possible reasons for the different ripening periods between transgenic and WT fruit from the metabolites and components perspectives. They also provide further information about the role played by  SlSAHH2  in tomato fruit ripening. Supplemental Information   Supplemental Information 1. Detailed information of 733 metabolites obtained from primary and secondary mass spectrometry for three species.       peerj-12-17466-s001.xlsx  (146.4KB, xlsx)      DOI: 10.7717/peerj.17466/supp-1   Supplemental Information 2. Detailed information of 547 metabolites compared from the HMDB database for three varieties.       peerj-12-17466-s002.xlsx  (27.2KB, xlsx)      DOI: 10.7717/peerj.17466/supp-2   Supplemental Information 3. Detailed information of the different metabolites of OE-5#  vs . WT（Corresponding volcano map）.