>Materials and methods   Imaging studies were performed at 3T (Achieva TX, Philips Healthcare, Best, Netherlands) using a 32-channel phased array. Animal studies were approved by the Johns Hopkins University Animal Care and Use Committee and the human studies were approved by Institutional Review Board of Tsinghua University. Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects. Image reconstruction and processing, and statistical analyses were implemented in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts, USA).   Data acquisition: Fully sampled whole heart 3D T2 mapping   The pulse sequence used for the acquisition of fully sampled 3D T2 maps is detailed by Ding et al. [ 13 ]. The feasibility of this approach has been validated on phantoms, swine and human subjects [ 13 ]. Briefly, three or four saturation-prepared volumes with a variety of T2-weightings imparted by T2-Preparation (T2-Prep) [ 25 ] were acquired in an interleaved manner. The resulting image volumes are co-localized and suitable for pixel-by-pixel parametric fitting.   Whole-heart T2 mapping data were acquired using 3D Cartesian sampling with 5/8 fractional readout segmented radiofrequency spoiled gradient echo. The following include typical imaging parameters: acquired resolution = 1.25×1.25×5.0mm 3 , T2-Prep echo times (TE) = 0, 25, 35, 45ms, repetition time/TE = 4.0/1.2ms, flip angle = 18°, 2.5 mm respiratory navigator acceptance window, ECG-triggered mid-diastolic acquisition, 12–18 readouts per heartbeat. Both volume localized B 1+  and B 0  shimming [ 26 ,  27 ] were performed to compensate for field inhomogeneities. Although fractional readouts were used, the datasets were regarded as fully sampled as only undersampling in the phase encoding directions was tested.   A total of 4 swine and 8 normal human subjects (1 male, 43±13 years old) were imaged. Three animals were imaged in the naïve state, and one was imaged 3 days after myocardial infarction induced by a 2-hr balloon occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery. The infarction resulted in significant edema. For the swine with infarction, the whole-heart T2 mapping data were acquired using the same methods as above but only 3 T2-Prep TEs 0, 25, and 45ms. Three retrospective undersampling patterns   All raw data were retrospectively undersampled using three different patterns ( Fig 1 ). An auto-calibration signal (ACS) composed of the 16×16 central k y ×k z  lines was kept fully sampled and an elliptical k-space shutter was applied to all patterns. The remaining k-space was undersampled by an outer k-space reduction factor (ORF) varying from 2–8 ( Fig 1 ). The net reduction factor (R net ), defined as the ratio between the number of sampled k-space lines and the total number of k-space lines in the elliptical window, appears in the corner of each subplot. The ACS not only preserves image contrast but also provides low resolution images for sensitivity map estimation [ 28 ]. The sensitivity map was calculated by a root-sum-of-square approach [ 29 ]. The size of the ACS was chosen empirically as a compromise between the quality of the calculated sensitivity maps and R net .   Fig 1. Sampling patterns used for the variety of reconstruction techniques tested.     Open in a new tab   The net reduction rate (R net ), shown in the bottom corner of each panel, is reduced relative to the outer reduction factor (ORF) due to the complete sampling of the center of  k -space. Six different VDR sampling patterns were tested (only one shown). Three different undersampling patterns were tested: equally spaced (ES) sampling, optimized 3D Controlled Aliasing In Parallel Imaging Results IN Higher Acceleration (Caipi) [ 30 – 32 ], and variable density random (VDR) sampling [ 23 ,  33 – 35 ].   First, the ES sampling pattern ( Fig 1 , top row) is typically utilized in Cartesian sensitivity encoding (SENSE) [ 29 ] and generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acquisitions (GRAPPA) [ 36 ] and is the pattern most widely used in a clinical setting. The same undersampling pattern was applied to all image volumes with different T2-prep TEs.   Second, the Caipi sampling pattern ( Fig 1 . middle row) depends on the ORF [ 30 ] and carefully selects the sampling pattern to minimize undersampling-induced aliasing in both phase encoding and parametric dimensions based on the point spread function [ 30 – 32 ]. The optimal k-space-temporal sampling patterns introduced in [ 30 ] were adopted. The sampling patterns for T2-prep images with larger TE were shifted by a pre-designed distance described in [ 30 ] compared to the image without T2-Prep. This pre-designed distance is periodic in ORF so if the ORF was greater than the number of TEs, only the first 3 or 4 shifts were applied.   Finally, the VDR sampling pattern causes incoherent aliasing [ 37 ] and is suitable for compressed sensing or sparsity-driven reconstruction [ 23 ]. In this work, 2D VDR sampling patterns were applied [ 35 ]. K-space lines were chosen according to a Gaussian probability density function (mean = 0, standard deviation = 0.5×maximum k-space radius) with respect to the distance from the k-space center. N unrepeated k-space lines outside the fully sampled central ACS k-space were selected, where N is the number of acquired k-space lines in the Caipi pattern leading to the same ORF. Therefore, VDR patterns have identical R net  as Caipi patterns for each ORF. These patterns were repeated 6 times independently to better characterize the outcomes given the random nature of VDR. The same undersampling pattern was applied to all image volumes with different T2-prep TEs for VDR sampling. Three image reconstruction approaches   Three different reconstruction approaches were quantitatively compared in this work. All three utilize iterative reconstruction [ 38 ,  39 ] and jointly reconstruct all volumes with different T2-prep weightings. The second and third approaches include regularization terms to reinforce similarity among volumes with different T2 weightings, based either on image structure or on exponential signal decay, and are expected to improve image quality [ 40 ].   The first approach, ‘multi-volume SENSE,’ uses conjugated gradient based iterative SENSE optimization [ 38 ], which is able to restore images from arbitrarily undersampled k-space. Compared to traditional iterative SENSE where each T2-prep weighted volume is reconstructed separately, here all volumes are combined and reconstructed jointly, which can be expressed as a minimization problem with a cost function of:      I ^ S E N S E = argmin I ( ‖ D E I − k ‖ 2 2 ) ,   (1)      where  I  and  I ^ S E N S E  are intermediate and final estimated multi-volume image, respectively,  D  is a diagonal undersampling operator,  E  is the encoding matrix, and  k  is the undersampled raw k-space data.   The second approach, ‘joint-sparsity SENSE,’ incorporates joint total variation constraint [ 21 ] as a sparsity constraint for regularization that enforces similarity of the edges of the images with different T2-prep TEs to regularize the conjugate gradient optimization. As is the case with most parametric mapping, the differentially-weighted volumes share a large amount of structural information and differ primarily in contrast. Joint-sparsity SENSE should improve reconstruction performance by further reinforcing those common structural details. The cost function for joint-sparsity SENSE is:      I ^ J S − S E N S E = argmin I { ‖ D E I − k ‖ 2 2 + λ ‖ I ‖ J T V } ,   (2)      where the regularization parameter  λ  is a weight for the joint total variation across the parameter dimension (i.e. differentially-weighted image volumes), fixed at 0.1 We define joint total variation [ 22 ,  41 ,  42 ] as follows:      ‖ I ‖ J T V = ∑ r → ∑ p ( ( ∇ x I ( r → , p ) ) 2 + ( ∇ y I ( r → , p ) ) 2 + ( ∇ z I ( r → , p ) ) 2 )   (3)      where  r → = ( x , y , z )  is the location of the voxels, and  x ,  y , and  z  are the pixel coordinate indexes in image space,  p ∈ { 1 ‥ # weighted images }  indexes the parameter space, i.e. the differentially weighted images, and ∇ x , ∇ y  and ∇ z  correspond to the discrete first order partial derivative in  x ,  y  and  z , respectively. Note that with this definition of a joint  l 1  norm, the existence of large coefficients in one of the differentially-weighted images protects the coefficients in the rest of the images from being suppressed by the non-linear reconstruction [ 41 ].   The third approach, ‘model-based SENSE,’ applied a T2-decay fitting error as a regularization constraint [ 22 ]. This fitting error is defined as the  l 1 , 2  norm of the difference between reconstructed image intensities and a fitted exponential decay curve ( I fit ) using the pixel by pixel natural log-transformed linear regression along the parametric dimension. This regularization enforces the T2 decay behavior of the T2-prepared images.  I fit  were estimated from the parameters obtained from the intermediate image  I . The cost function is expressed as:      I ^ M B − S E N S E = argmin I ( ‖ D E I − k ‖ 2 2 + λ ‖ I − I f i t ‖ 1 , 2 ) .   (4)      The  l 1 , 2  norm of the parametric fitting error  ‖ I − I f i t ‖ 1 , 2  is calculated as      ‖ I − I f i t ‖ 1 , 2 = ∑ r → ( ∑ p | I ( r → , p ) − I f i t ( r → , p ) | ) 2 .   (5)      The Projected Gradients MOdelConsistency COndition in robust (l 1 ) fashion algorithm described in [ 22 ], which is a Projection onto Convex Sets [ 39 ] based iterative reconstruction algorithm, was implemented with an updated weight ( λ ) of 0.5 to balance SENSE and T2 fitting error.  I fit  is synthesized form the log-transformed linear regression by:      I f i t ( r → , p ) = exp ( [ 1 − T E p ] [ l o g ( A 0 ¯ ( r → ) ) R 2 ¯ ( r → ) ] )   (6)      where  A 0  is the image intensity without T2 weighting, and  R 2 = 1/T2 is the spin-spin relaxation rate. For any voxel  r → , estimates  A 0 ¯  and  R 2 ¯  are generated from linear regression of the image intensities as described in [ 13 ].   For comparison, two reference reconstructions were used: First, after pre-whitening and homodyne processing to compensate for partial echo sampling [ 43 ], the fully sampled data was reconstructed by direct inverse fast Fourier transform with root-sum-of-square coil combination to generate the ‘Reference’ reconstruction. Second, as an additional reference, standard SENSE reconstruction [ 29 ] using ES undersampling was applied separately to each individual T2-prep weighted image volume and referred to as ‘Traditional SENSE.’ The two references were used to determine the deterioration of the parametric maps with respect to reconstructions using original fully sampled data as well as those obtained from undersampled data processed using a well-understood and readily available linear reconstruction approach. Image analysis   For each swine and human dataset, the left ventricular (LV) myocardium was manually segmented on the fully sampled reference to generate a 3D region of interest (ROI) by an observer with >10 years’ experience with cardiac MRI. Root-mean-square errors (RMSE) relative to the fully sampled reference were calculated via pixel-wise comparison within the ROI. RMSE was calculated for both reconstructed images and T2 maps. The resulting data are provided as supplementary material in  S1 Dataset .   For naïve swine and human subject data, we assumed uniform T2 values in the LV and spatially averaged the T2 values in the ROI and calculated the corresponding standard deviation (SD) as a measure of precision. The bias in T2, the difference of the average T2 relative to that of the fully sampled reference data, was calculated to examine the potential loss of accuracy in T2.   For the swine with acute MI, an Otsu’s threshold [ 44 ] was chosen to segment pixels into normal and edematous myocardium. The thresholds were separately computed from each reconstructed T2 map. The intersection-over-union index, i.e., the Jaccard index, was then calculated to examine the effects of acceleration rate on the accuracy of tissue characterization with parametric mapping. More specifically, the Jaccard index is the ratio of the number of voxels in the overlapped area over the union area of edematous myocardium segmented from the reference image (A ref ) and the undersampled reconstructions (A recon ):      Jaccard index = | A r e f ∩ A r e c o n | | A r e f ∪ A r e c o n | ,   (7)      where  | ⋅ |  is the number of voxels in an area. The Jaccard index ranges from 0 (A ref  and A recon  do not match at all) to 1 (A ref  and A recon  completely match).   While comparing T2 maps, voxels within the ROI with T2>100 or T2<15 were considered unsuccessfully recovered through recon and excluded. These voxels were counted and the percentage relative to the total number of voxels in the ROI was determined for each individual.   To compare the most successful reconstructions, the Wilcoxson signed rank test was used for all 4 metrics across ORF (significance at p<0.05/4 after modified Bonferroni correction). Results   The average scan time of fully sampled data acquired from the 3 naïve swine and 8 normal human subjects was 6.6±1.8 min. R net  of the retrospectively undersampled data using ES, Caipi and VDR sampling patterns ranged from 1.8 to 4.9 when ORF varied from 2 to 8 ( Fig 1 ). The net reduction factors further varied among subjects due to differences in the prescribed field-of-view and, hence, matrix size.   Fig 2  shows one slice of the reconstructed T2-weighted images (T2-prep TE = 45ms) and the T2 maps of a representative normal human subject. The complete 3D datasets can be viewed in  S1 Video . All sampling patterns and reconstruction methods are demonstrated with the full range of ORF from 2–8 together with the fully sampled reference. At ORF = 2 and 3, the reconstructed images and T2 maps are similar to the reference. As ORF increased to 4–6, some aliasing artifacts can be observed in the T2-weighted images with traditional SENSE and Caipi based reconstructions and some blurring can be observed in VDR based reconstructions. The T2 values of the inferior septal and posterior part of the LV wall using the joint-sparsity SENSE and the model-based SENSE with VDR sampling are better preserved than other methods. When ORF is high (7 and 8), both artifacts and blurring can be observed in the T2-weighted images of all methods and the artifacts and blurring in the T2-weighted images are much stronger. T2 maps using joint-sparsity SENSE and the model-based SENSE with VDR sampling are less corrupted than other methods though errors can be observed in the septal and posterior part of the LV wall. The T2 maps with ORF>4 (R net  larger than 3) exhibit significant artifacts compared to the fully sampled reference, therefore, the following results focus on ORF = 2, 3, and 4.   Fig 2. T2-weighted images and T2 maps of a normal human subject with ORF = 2–8 and all reconstruction approaches.     Open in a new tab   T2-Prep TE is 45 ms in the T2-weighted images. As ORF increases (top to bottom), images from all approaches appear noisier and blurrier, and additionally images from traditional SENSE and Caipi sampling patterns suffer from ghosting artifacts. The complete dataset including all slices for all reconstructions can be seen in  S1 Video . Fig 3  demonstrates one image of the T2-prepared volume with the longest T2-Prep TE = 45 ms ( Fig 3A, 3C and 3E ) and, h