>Methods   Construction of the In-House Standard Database CQMD   The in-house database, which we named Chongqing Metabolomics Database (CQMD), contained 4535 compounds with unique IUPAC names and different CAS numbers, including endogenous metabolites, gut microbial metabolites, medicine and food homology compounds, and common clinical drugs. The standard compounds were purchased from the distributors MedChemExpress (New Jersey) and Selleck (Texas). The database was constructed using an Orbitrap Exploris 120 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system. Each compound was analyzed, when possible, in four modes: C18 column with positive ionization (CP), C18 column with negative ionization (CN), amide column with positive ionization (AP), and amide column with negative ionization (AN), using 13 individual NCEs (NCE 1, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 100%), and stepped NCE 20/40/60%. The detailed chromatographic and MS conditions are shown in the  Supporting Information .   The next MS/MS spectrum following the full scan spectrum with the highest-intensity precursor ion was retained for each compound, after which the background noise and invalid fragments were removed, as detailed in the  Supporting Information . The code for the construction of CQMD can be found on GitHub ( https://github.com/academicCQMD/LongitudinalProf-MSMS-Method , 001–004). Due to the presence of salt ions, hydrates, or stereoisomers, several compounds exhibited identical planar structures in MS detection, which were referred to as “identical isomers”. In contrast, the isomers with different planar structures in MS detection were termed “constitutional isomers”. Development of a Longitudinal Profiling-Based Method for Metabolite Identification Using CQMD   The mass spectra of identical isomers and constitutional isomers in the CQMD were used for method development. The mass tolerance of fragments in each spectrum was set to 0.01  m / z , and the highest RII within the mass tolerance was retained. ( 7 ) Similarly, fragment ions from different CEs with 0.01  m / z  mass differences were aligned to the lowest  m / z , and for each CE, the highest RII within the mass range was assigned to the fragment with lowest  m / z . ( 25 , 26 ) Fragments with RII of less than 2% were considered invalid and were treated as 0. ( 25 , 26 ) The LFP comprising the RIIs of a fragment across 13 individual CEs, was compared with the LFP vector of the identical  m / z  fragment in isomers. The similarity score of each LFP was individually calculated using the Jaccard algorithm according to  eq 1 :      Jaccard similarity score = 1 − Σ ( I q , i − I r , i ) 2 Σ I q , i 2 + Σ I r , i 2 − Σ I q , i ⋅ I r , i   (1)     where  I q, i  is the LFP value of the query spectrum and  I r, i  is the LFP value of the reference spectrum.   The detailed code for calculating LFP similarity can be found on GitHub ( https://github.com/academicCQMD/LongitudinalProf-MSMS-Method , 005). In the simulations of metabolite identification, either a compound in each pair of isomers served as the reference spectrum or query spectrum, resulting in two computational cases for each pair of identical or constitutional isomers. We recorded the number of LFPs in the reference MS/MS spectrum as “ N ”. Then, we calculated the total RIIs across 13 distinct CEs in both the reference and query spectra for each LFP, named  Yi  ( i  = 1, 2,  …N ) by ranking the total RIIs from the greatest to the least. The corresponding similarity score of the ordered LFPs between the reference and query spectra was calculated and recorded as  Si  ( i = 1 , 2, and  …N ). When a  Si  less than 0.5 appeared first, we recorded its ranking number “ i ″ as “ I ”. Finally, we calculated the  I/N  ratio for all identical constitutional isomers. The obtained  I/N  ratios were systematically analyzed using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, and the sensitivity and specificity, which served as metrics for evaluating identification accuracy, were calculated according to  eqs 2  and  3 , respectively:      Sensitivity = number of correctly identified identical isomers / total number of identical isomers × 100 %   (2)       Specificity = number of correctly identified constitutional isomers / total number of constitutional isomers × 100 %   (3)   Identification of Metabolites in CQMD Using Cross-Sectional Profiling Method   The RIIs of the fragments in each spectrum were represented as vectors for similarity calculation using dot product, entropy, and Jaccard algorithms ( Supporting Information ). Each pair of reference spectrum and query spectrum underwent 14 comparisons considering the MS/MS spectra acquired at 13 individual NCEs and stepped NCE 20/40/60%. Ideally, the similarity scores of identical isomers should exceed a specific threshold, while the scores of constitutional isomers should fall below that threshold. In this scenario, the sensitivity representing the percentage of correctly identified identical isomers was calculated by  eq 4 , and the specificity representing the percentage of correctly identified constitutional isomers was calculated by  eq 5 . The relevant code can be found on GitHub ( https://github.com/academicCQMD/LongitudinalProf-MSMS-Method , 005).     Sensitivity = number of identical isomers above a threshold / total number of identical isomers × 100 %   (4)       Specificity = number of constitutional isomers below a threshold / total number of constitutional isomers × 100 %   (5)   Method Validation with Inter-Instrument Standard Spectra   150 metabolites in CP mode and 134 metabolites in CN mode were randomly selected for the evaluation of inter-instrument reliability. The spectrum acquisition is shown in the  Supporting Information . The spectrum processing was identical to that of in-house CQMD, and the obtained spectra were used as query spectra to calculate the similarity to the reference spectra in CQMD. Preparation of Spiked Plasma Samples for Method Validation   The plasma sample was pooled from six healthy volunteers. The 150 metabolites in CP mode and 134 metabolites in CN mode for the inter-instrument validation were spiked to the pooled plasma, with a final concentration of 2 μM. The sample processing is shown in the  Supporting Information . The resulting supernatant was then ready for detection. The MS analysis and data processing were the same as those of the standard solution. Application of the Proposed Method for Real Plasma Samples   The real plasma samples were from a metabolomics cohort of patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and healthy controls. Sample preparation was the same as that of the spiked plasma. Quality control (QC) samples were prepared by pooling 5 μL of each sample supernatant. Same as in refs ( 14 , 15 ), the plasma sample was acquired with full scan mode to obtain the metabolite abundance, and the QC samples were acquired with full scan-ddMS 2  mode for structural identification. MS-DIAL software was used for deconvolution, peak picking, and alignment, and the parameters were set by default. The mass spectra of the QC samples were analyzed in the same way as the standard spectra, and metabolite structures were identified through longitudinal and cross-sectional profiling using in-house CQMD. The detailed code can be found on GitHub ( https://github.com/academicCQMD/LongitudinalProf-MSMS-Method , 006–007).   Metabolites in the in-house CQMD with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm from the detected metabolic features were regarded as candidates. For the cross-sectional method, the candidates were further filtered based on the similarity score threshold. The candidate with the highest similarity score above the preset threshold was considered as the match. In the same way, for the proposed longitudinal method, candidates were filtered and ranked by the different “criterion factor”, defined as the ratio of the number of LFPs with a similarity score over 0.5 within the criteria to the required number of LFPs with a similarity score above 0.5 by the criteria. Metabolite identification using the Jaccard algorithm was carried out at 8 criterion factors: 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, and 0.95. The candidate with the highest criteria factor was considered as the match; in the case of the same criterion factor, priority was given to the candidate with more LFPs with a similarity score greater than 0.5, followed by the one with LFPs above 0.5 score ranking at the forefront and finally the one with the largest sum of similarity scores.   The identification accuracy and false discovery rate were calculated using  eqs 6  and  7 , respectively:      Accuracy = number of correct annotations / total annotations by spectral matching × 100 %   (6)       False discovery rate = number of incorrect annotations / total annotations by spectral matching × 100 %   (7)   Ethics Statement   The human plasma samples used in this study adhered to the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki and received approval from the medical ethics committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University. The institutional review board of the hospital granted a waiver of informed consent, as the samples utilized in this study were residuals from laboratory tests (Approval No. 2023–044). Results and Discussion   Longitudinal Profiling Outperforms Cross-Sectional Evaluation in Metabolite Identification   Here we used leucine (HMDB0000687) and isoleucine (HMDB0000172), the two quite common metabolites, as an example to demonstrate the potential of longitudinal profiling outperforming cross-sectional evaluation in metabolite identification. The MS/MS spectra of leucine ( Figure 1a ) and isoleucine ( Figure 1b ) were visually similar to the CEs between NCE 1 and 60%, but showed noticeable differences at NCE 70, 80, and 100%. By using the cross-sectional evaluation of the MS/MS spectra with all 13 NCEs, the similarity score was consistently over 0.5 (most over 0.7), across all three algorithms, including dot product, ( 17 ) modified dot product, ( 20 ) and entropy ( 18 ) ( Excel S1 ). The similarity score of the MS/MS spectra of these two metabolites at NCE 35% is exemplarily presented in  Figure 1c  (upper panel). In some cases, candidates with a score of over 0.5 are considered the correct hits or the ones deserving further study. ( 17 ) Additionally, the similarity scores of the combined MS/MS spectra at stepped NCE 20/40/60% by the three algorithms were 0.99, 0.94, and 0.89, respectively ( Excel S1 ). This example evidenced the limitation of the classic cross-sectional evaluation of MS/MS spectra in metabolite identification, resulting in some incorrect annotations.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Example demonstrating the advantage of longitudinal profiling over cross-sectional evaluation. Cross-sectional and longitudinal profiling of (a) leucine and (b) isoleucine. (c) Cross-sectional evaluation of MS/MS spectra of leucine and isoleucine at NCE 35% was unable to distinguish leucine from isoleucine (top), but that of the longitudinal profile of the  m / z  69.07 fragment could do so (bottom). (d) Optimization of algorithms for longitudinal profiling. An ideal algorithm is expected to provide high scores for the visually similar LFPs of the  m / z  132.10, 86.10, 44.05, and 41.04 fragments, and low scores for the visually different LFPs of the  m / z  69.07 and 43.05 fragments. In light of this, the Jaccard algorithm is the optimal one among the 19 tested 19 algorithms. The detailed equations for 19 algorithms are shown in  Supporting Note . In contrast, the proposed longitudinal similarity evaluation focused on an LFP, which was represented as a vector composed of the RIIs of the identical  m / z  fragment across different CEs, allowing for an independent similarity score for each LFP. As illustrated in  Figure 1 , the longitudinal profiles of the  m / z  69.07 and 43.05 fragments for leucine and isoleucine were visually different, while those of  m / z  132.10, 86.10, 44.05, and 41.04 fragments were visually similar. To distinguish the visual differences, we evaluated the similarity for the above 6 LFPs across 13 NCEs using 19 algorithms. An ideal algorithm is expected to provide high scores for the visually similar LFPs of the  m / z  132.10, 86.10, 44.05, and 41.04 fragments, and low scores for the visually different LFPs of the  m / z  69.07 and 43.05 fragments. From this perspective, the Jaccard algorithm was the most appropriate among the 19 algorithms, assigning similarity scores of at least 0.9 for the four visually similar LFPs and less than 0.1 for the two visually different LFPs ( Figure 1d ). The comparison of LFP of  m / z  69.07 is shown in  Figure 1c  (bottom panel), receiving a similarity score of 0.06 by the Jaccard algorithm. Because the classic dot product algorithm merely focused on the variation trends of two intensity vectors, it assigned high similarity scores to all six fragments ( Figure 1d ). The newly proposed entropy algorithm focused on probability distribution rather than intensity differences and was unable to assign low scores to the  m / z  43.05 and 69.07 fragments ( Figure 1d ). The putative fragment patterns of leucine and isoleucine are shown in  Figure S1 .   Importantly, the  m / z  43.05 and 69.07 fragments, which reflected the structural differences between leucine and isoleucine, were minute fragments in the MS/MS spectra. As shown in  Excel S1 , the absence of  m / z  69.07 and 43.05 fragments affected only the similarity scores of up to 0.23 for all 13 NCEs. The application of the Jaccard algorithm for cross-sectional evaluation yielded similarity scores comparable to those obtained using the dot product and entropy algorithms at 13 individual NCEs and stepped NCE 20/40/60% ( Excel S1 ), all unable to distinguish leucine from isoleucine, indicating the negligible role of minute fragments in the cross-sectional matching method. In contrast, the proposed longitudinal profiling highlighted the critical role of minute fragments for structural differentiation, and the low-scoring LFP could be used to filter out unqualified candidates. Reasonably, the differences in predominant fragments could be used by longitudinal profiling as well, serving an equal role to that of minute fragments. To further elucidate the advantage of longitudinal profiling, we evaluated the similarity of norleucine (HMDB01645) to leucine and isoleucine. Norleucine is an isomer of leucine and isoleucine existing in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans with a concentration up to millimolar. ( 27 ) These three isomers have often been misidentified with each other by using the cross-sectional matching method. In contrast, norleucine was successfully distinguished from leucine and isoleucine by longitudinal profiling ( Figure S2  and  Excel S1 ), reiterating the potential of metabolite identification by longitudinal profiling. Establishment of an In-House Large-Scale Dataset (CQMD)   To test the advantage of longitudinal profiling over traditional cross-sectional analysis, we established an in-house MS/MS database, CQMD, comprising 4535 standard compounds. Statistical analysis indicated that the MS/MS spectra of 3878, 2950, 3200, and 2798 standard compounds were satisfactorily recorded under CP, CN, AP, and AN modes, respectively ( Excel S2 ). The MS/MS spectra of each compound were acquired at 14 NCEs (including 13 distinct NCE and stepped NCE 20/40/60%), resulting in approximately 1,80,000 MS/MS spectra included in the CQMD. Of note, there were 260 (253 protonated, 7 sodiated), 182 (deprotonated), 235 (228 protonated, 7 sodiated), and 160 (deprotonated) pairs of identical isomers under CP, CN, AP, and AN modes, respectively, and 1490 (1439 protonated, 51 sodiated), 1423 (deprotonated), 851 (823 protonated, 28 sodiated), and 1211 (deprotonated) pairs of constitutional isomers under CP, CN, AP, and AN modes, respectively ( Excel S3 ). The CEs ranged from NCE 1 to 100% due to two facts: ( 1 ) NCE 1% mostly preserved the precursor ion, whereas increasing CE value enhanced the abundance of production in the low  m / z  range; ( 2 ) statistics showed that NCE 100% resulted in more than 96.5% of metabolites in mzCloud suffering sufficient fragmentation (precursor intensity less than 20%). ( 28 ) Undeniably, acquiring the MS/MS spectra for thousands of metabolites at 13 different CEs and step NCE 20/40/60% was a labor-intensive task. We attempted to explore metabolite identification criteria for the longitudinal profiling method using public datasets. However, the collision energies for compounds are limited in the available public datasets. Establishment of Identification Criteria and Benchmarking Identification Accuracy for Longitudinal Profiling Using CQMD   Identical and constitutional isomers in the CQMD were used to optimize the identification criteria for longitudinal profiling. The similarity score of each LFP was individually calculated by using the Jaccard algorithm. The  I/N  ratio was calculated for each pair of reference/query spectra, where  I  denotes the index of the ranked fragment first having a similarity score below 0.5 and  N  represents the total number of fragments in the reference spectrum (see the  Methods  section for details). As shown in  Figure S3 , regarding the isomers across the four modes with different numbers of LFP, the  I/N  ratio for identical isomers was almost greater than 0.5, while the ratio for constitutional isomers was typically less than 0.5. To achieve optimal identification performance for these isomers, the  I/N  ratios were systematically analyzed using ROC curves. The cutoff values of the  I/N  ratios for the reference spectra of protonated/deprotonated adducts with different LFP numbers are shown in  Figure 2 , with the area under the ROC curve (AUC) values ranging from 0.874 to 0.991 for all four modes. The detailed  I/N  ratios for the isomers with different LFP numbers are shown in  Excel S3 . The average sensitivity for the isomers in the CP, CN, AP, and AN modes was 100, 98.35, 99.56, and 99.69%, respectively. Correspondingly, the average specificities for these modes were 92.98, 91.67, 94.17, and 91.91%. Of course, we anticipate an additional improvement in both the accuracy and quantity of annotated metabolites as more metabolites are included in CQMD.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Optimization of metabolite identification criteria for longitudinal profiling. ROC curves for identical isomers and constitutional isomers with LFP numbers (a) 3–7, (b) 8–12, (c) 13–17, and (d) 18, 19, 20, 21–25, and ≥ 26. (e) Cutoff values of the  I/N  ratio for different LFPs. For the identical isomers, all fragments ranked within the total LFP number of reference spectrum multiplied by the corresponding cutoff value (rounded up to the next integer if a decimal) should have a similarity score of at least 0.5. Conversely, for the constitutional isomers, at least one fragment within this ranking range should have a similarity score of less than 0.5. Regarding the ROC curves for different LFP numbers, sensitivity was defined as the percentage of correctly identified identical isomers relative to the total number of identical isomers, and specificity was defined as the percentage of correctly identified constitutional isomers to the total number of constitutional isomers. The inability to achieve 100% sensitivity indicated that the reproducibility of the spectra was not as robust as expected. This phenomenon may be attributed to the random errors inherent in the full scan-ddMS 2  mode employed in this experiment. ( 29 ) One reason specificity could not reach 100% was that the MS/MS spectra of some misidentified constitutional isomers were indeed very similar. Based on the cutoff criteria established using the Jaccard algorithm, the sensitivity and specificity of the protonated adducts in CP mode were evaluated by entropy and dot product algorithms. As shown in  Excel S4 , the sensitivity and specificity of the entropy algorithm were 100 and 50.83%, respectively, while the sensitivity and specificity of the dot product algorithm were 99.80 and 83.77%, respectively. Furthermore, the  I/N  ratio in the reference spectra obtained from the dot product algorithm was specifically analyzed using ROC, yielding a sensitivity of 99.01% and a specificity of 87.18%, still lower than those of the Jaccard algorithm.   Additionally, the accuracy of compounds in the sodium adduct was evaluated using the criteria established with protonated/deprotonated compounds. Regarding the CP mode, 10 out of 14 identical isomers and 93 out of 102 constitutional isomers were correctly identified. Concerning the AP mode, 8 out of 14 identical isomers and 52 out of 56 constitutional isomers were satisfactorily identified ( Excel S3 ). This reiterated the fact that sodium adducts are less robust than protonated/deprotonated adducts during the electrospray process. ( 30 )   To investigate the effect of applied NCE on LFPs, the sensitivity and specificity for all isomers across four modes in CQMD were reanalyzed at NCE ranges of 1–70% and 1–60% using the same method as above. The average sensitivity and specificity for NCE 1–70% were 98.57 and 90.87%, respectively ( Excel S5 ), and the average sensitivity and specificity for NCE 1–60% were 96.83 and 88.63%, respectively ( Excel S6 ). Compared with the average sensitivity and specificity of 98.89 and 92.66% achieved by NCE 1–100% ( Excel S3 ), the absence of spectra at high CEs resulted in a slight decrease in identification accuracy. Demonstrating the Advantage of Longitudinal Profiling over Cross-Sectional Evaluation Using CQMD   The cross-sectional evaluation was performed with the entropy, dot product, and Jaccard algorithms. The sensitivity and specificity achieved by the Jaccard algorithm were marginally higher than those by dot product algorithm and surpassed those by the entropy algorithm ( Excel S7 ).  Figure S4  shows the sensitivity and specificity for the four modes obtained with the Jaccard algorithm. Across 13 distinct NCEs, an increase in threshold resulted in a slight decrease in sensitivity b