>Materials and methods   Case collection   According to the 2016 ISTH SSC classification guidelines for DVT, the metabolomics study plans to recruit 32 DVT patients from the Department of Vascular Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of University of South China, Hunan Province, China, between April 2022 and June 2023. And 30 healthy subjects were also from the physical examination center of the same hospital at the same time. To eliminate potential confounding variables, participants in both groups were matched by gender, age and body mass index. Additionally, 11 DVT patients and 6 healthy subjects for bulk RNA sequencing (bulk RNA-seq) were recruited study using the same methodology, which served as the test set. These samples were randomly selected from the participants of metabolomics study. The corresponding external validation set was collected during the same experimental period, comprising samples from 12 DVT patients and 6 healthy subjects. To facilitate further analysis of the pathological mechanism of DVT, different batches of samples from 3 DVT patients and 3 healthy subjects were selected for scRNA-seq independently. The inclusion criteria were as follows: i) at least one test result (including ultrasonography or D-dimer test) supports the diagnosis of DVT, ii) patients with first-episode acute DVT, iii) no anticoagulation, and iv) age ≥ 18 years. The exclusion criteria encompass the following 4 items: i) antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), ii) pregnancy or lactation, iii) infection or use of immunosuppressants within 2 weeks prior to enrollment, and iv) active or prior malignancy. The multi-omics data features utilised in this study are delineated in Supplementary Table  1 . The study was conducted in accordance with the internationally recognized principles of the Declaration of Helsinki, and was reviewed and approved by the Hospital Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital of the University of South China (2022K091301). Prior to enrolment, written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Total metabolim assay and quality testing   According to the standard protocol of LC-Bio Technology Co., Ltd. (Hangzhou, China), we used the methanol precipitated protein method to extract the non-targeted metabolites from the samples, and prepared quality control (QC) samples (mixed with the same amount of prepared experimental samples), and the samples to be tested were randomly sorted and then inserted into the QC samples for repeated evaluation of the experimental technique. All chromatographic separations were performed using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). And an ACQUITY UPLC T3 column (100 mm*2.1 mm, 1.8 µm, Waters, United States) was used for the reversed phase separation. And we used a tandem high-resolution mass spectrometry (THRMS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) to perform a mass positive and negative ion scan of the samples, and collected QC samples ( n  = 11) after every 10 samples to assess the stability of the acquisition process. The precise mass error of the precursor ion is confined to a margin of error of 10 ppm. The acquired data pretreatments including peak picking, peak grouping, retention time correction, second peak grouping, and annotation of isotopes and adducts was performed by using R package XCMS (v1.48.0). Total RNA assay and quality testing   According to the manufacturer’s protocol, total genes were isolated and purified using TRIzol (Aidlab, China) and also a Fragment Analyzer (Agilent, United States) was used to detect the total gene amount, concentration, volume, RNA integrity number (RIN) value and 28S/18S of the sample. And then use the MGIEasy rRNA removal kit (MGI, China) to remove ribosomal RNA (rRNA) from the total RNA according to the instructions. The construction of the library was undertaken in strict accordance with the established protocols. Subsequently, the DNBSEQ platform (MGI, China) was utilised for the execution of bulk RNA-seq. The data were analyzed on the Dr. Tom network platform ( http://report.bgi.com ) of BGI Genomics Co., Ltd. (Shenzhen, China). The raw data obtained from sequencing were filtered using SOAPnuke (v1.5.6), so as to finally obtain clean data. The identification of variants was achieved through the alignment of clean data to a reference genome (GCF_000001405.39_GRCh38.p13) using HISTA2 (v2.1.0). Identification of differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs)   The online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) were used to annotate the metabolites by matching the exact molecular mass data (m/z) of samples with those from databases. At the same time, we used the functions princomp and prcomp to perform principal component analysis (PCA) on the identified metabolites to observe the separation trend between groups of samples and reflect the variability between and within groups from the original data. Then we used R package mixOmics (v6.3.2) and ropls (v1.34.0) to perform partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) on the samples, and also calculated the variable important for the projection (VIP) to measure the influence of each metabolite expression pattern on the classification discrimination of each group of samples and the explanatory ability. In the present study, log 2  [FC] was set to 1.5, and the R packages EdgeR (v3.32.1) and limma (v3.26.8) were utilised for the identification of DEMs (VIP was set to 1). The aforementioned results underwent filtration according to the false discovery rate (FDR) criterion, with a cut-off value of 0.05. In a similar fashion, in order to illustrate the macroscopic metabolic differences in DVT, the R packages clusterProfiler (v4.12.0) and org.Hs.eg.db (v3.18.0) were utilised in order to perform KEGG enrichment analysis for DEMs. Identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs)   Analogous to non-targeted metabolite analysis, PCA was employed to comprehend the characteristics and similarities among the samples. Subsequently, log 2  [FC] was set to 0.8 and the R package limma was utilised to identify DEGs. In order to further explore the gene functions related to phenotypic changes, the R packages clusterProfiler and org.Hs.eg.db were utilised to perform Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and KEGG enrichment analysis for DEGs. The candidate genes with FDR < 0.05 were defined as the threshold. In order to gain deeper insights into the biological significance of the aforementioned DEGs, their interactions at the protein level were investigated using the STRING ( https://string-db.org/ ). The requisite confidence level (combined score) was designated as medium (0.400). Furthermore, the Cytoscape (v3.10.0) was utilised for the purpose of visualisation. Concurrently, multi-algorithm network analysis was performed using cytoHubba (v0.1) to identify the top 25 genes. 3 algorithms were selected for evaluation: degree, stress and radiality. Identification of highly correlated genes and metabolites based on two-way orthogonal partial least squares (O2PLS)   In order to ascertain the potential regulatory relationship between the two omics components, the O2PLS analysis was performed on the DEGs and plasma-associated DEMs using the R package OmicsPLS (v2.0.2). The prevalent variation is conducive to the precise extraction of the gene-metabolite core network associated with the pathological state and function of DVT from multi-omics data. The number of elements in the O2PLS was determined through 10 cross-validations, and the model with the smallest prediction error was selected. The selected model, characterised by a particular number of shared components, optimally captures the stable covariance relationship between X and Y, thereby quantifying the model’s predictive capability [ 18 ,  19 ]. Concurrently, the factor loading of the amalgamated elements was visualised, thus enabling the identification of the top 25 genes and metabolites that contributed most significantly to the covariance. Among these, the loading is defined as the strength and direction of the relationship between the original variable (i.e. a single gene or metabolite) and the “common component” extracted by the model [ 20 ]. Correlation analysis of the two omics   In accordance with the multi-omics regulation theory, the Spearman’s coefficient was set to 0.5, and the intra-group correlation analysis results of the aforementioned DEGs and DEMs were plotted, with the objective of screening and analysing the linkage effect within them. Concurrently, the Spearman’s coefficient was set to 0.5, and the R package psych (v2.4.3) was utilised to quantitatively calculate and screen the interaction between the two omics samples, and to plot the network diagram. The visualisation of the above network plots was conducted using the Cytoscape (v3.10.0) software. The top 15 genes and metabolites of the interactions were screened by cytoHubba (v0.1). Identification of hub DEMs and DEGs based on ML approaches   In order to ascertain the most efficacious models, the present study employed R packages caret (v6.0–94), DALEX (v2.4.3), kernlab (v0.9–32), randomForest (v4.7–1.1) and xgboost (v1.7.7.1) to perform four common ML algorithms (including SVM, GLM, RF and XGBoost). The study then utilised these algorithms to plot box plots and reverse cumulative distributions of the residuals, in order to identify statistically significant differences between model predictions. In order to ascertain the interpretability and clinical relevance of the model, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the model was plotted using the R package pROC (v1.18.5). The discriminant ability of the model was evaluated by measuring the area under the curve (AUC), to identify potential targets associated with DVT. The delong method was used to calculate the 95% confidence interval (CI) of the AUC value to test the difference between AUC. Construction and evaluation for the clinical prediction model of DVT   The construction of a nomogram was facilitated by the R package rms (v6.7–1) to explore the potential clinical value of the expression of the hub genes in DVT patients and healthy subjects, with a view to predicting the risk of disease. Subsequently, the function lrm is employed to plot the calibration curve, thereby facilitating the assessment of the congruence between the predicted and actual values. As with the ML approach, the ROC curve is utilised to assess the precision of the prediction model in accordance with the same methodology. For each individual gene, the ROC curves were plotted separately to assess their accuracy and reliability. Verification of the expression trend of each gene in the aforementioned model is undertaken on the basis of the description provided in the external validation set. Analysis of scRNA-seq data   Fresh peripheral blood samples were separated according to standard procedures and prepared into a single-cell suspension. The prepared single-cell suspension (concentration range: 800 to 1200 cells/μl) was used to generate gel emulsion microspheres (GEMs) in the Chromium Controller (10X Genomics), followed by reverse transcription of messenger RNA (mRNA) to generate the complementary DNA (cDNA). The library has been constructed in accordance with the standard scheme formulated by BGI Genomics Co., Ltd., and all samples are subject to QC, filtration and analysis of the standard scheme. The cell count and subsequent filtration were conducted utilising the R package Seurat (v5.3.0), while the initial identification of 2000 highly variable feature genes was facilitated by DoubletDetection (v3.0). The PCA was employed to reduce data dimensionality, with the optimal inflection point determined using the elbow plot. Concurrently, the samples underwent nonlinear dimensionality reduction using the uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) algorithm. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used by default to identify significantly DEGs between cell clusters, with thresholds set at log 2  [FC] > 1 or log 2  [FC] < −1 and FDR < 0.05. Manual cell type matching and annotation were performed using CellMarker ( http://xteam.xbio.top ) and National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI,  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ). The Spearman’s method was employed to analyse the correlation of DEGs with cell types in different samples, with R package ggpubr (v0.6.0) utilised for this purpose. High-throughput determination of metal elements   In accordance with the aforementioned inclusion and exclusion criteria, peripheral blood samples were collected from 25 DVT patients and 25 healthy subjects. These samples were collected independently and within the same time period, in accordance with the same criteria. In accordance with prevailing protocols, freshly obtained peripheral blood samples are subjected to a dilution pretreatment, the purpose of which is to eliminate the presence of organic impurities. Following parameter optimisation, adjustments must be made to the oxide interference level (CeO + /Ce + ) and the double-charge interference level (Ba 2+ /Ba + ). Conduct inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) measurements in accordance with standard protocols, ensuring thorough flushing between samples with dilute nitric acid to prevent cross-contamination. The automatic calculation of sample concentrations was based on standard curves, with the internal standard method being used to correct for signal drift and matrix suppression effects in real time. The method was validated using QC samples. Analysis of statistical results   All the statistical analyses were performed with R (v4.3.3) and SPSS (v23.0). In the case of normally distributed data, a t-test is typically employed for analysis, with results typically expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. Non-normally distributed data were subjected to the Mann-Whitney test and reported as the median of the quartile. The sample size for scRNA-seq is contingent upon the availability of clinical samples. The value of  p  < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. * p  < 0.05; ** p  < 0.01; *** p  < 0.001; **** p  < 0.0001; NS, no significant difference. Results   Overview of metabolomic and transcriptome assay results   In accordance with the established protocol, we employ positive and negative ion modes to identify polar and non-polar molecules in cell samples. Following XCMS processing of the data, metaX was employed to match the m/z values of the original data with HMDB, thereby facilitating primary metabolite identification. A total of 62 samples (including 11 QC samples) and 71,786 positive and negative ions were detected. Concurrently, the QC samples, the DVT patient samples and the healthy subject samples were all in similar geometric positions, indicating that the samples were naturally clustered, with minor discrepancies between groups and an overall satisfactory distribution. Concurrently, the DNBSEQ platform identified 35 samples and 120,455 genes through sample screening, sample extraction, and high-throughput sequencing, with an average data set of 11.33 gigabytes and an average genome alignment rate of 97.39%. The Q-Sanger value was greater than 30 for more than 90% of the filtered clean data, and the proportion of GRCh38.p13 genome alignment in 35 samples was greater than 92%. Identification and integrative analysis of DEMs   According to the HMDB classification annotation, the majority of the positive and negative ions are classified as lipids and lipid-like molecules, and the overall distribution of positive and negative ions is basically the same (Fig.  1 a). Furthermore, the KEGG enrichment pathway demonstrates that the detected ions are concentrated in various metabolic pathways, including those associated with carbohydrate, amino acid and lipid metabolism (Fig.  1 b). In the absence of supervision, PCA revealed that there was, in fact, partial overlap in the sample points of the two groups (Fig.  1 c). This is a true reflection of the high heterogeneity inherent in biological samples. In order to reveal the specific variants associated with DVT in greater detail, the PLS-DA was employed again. As demonstrated in Fig.  1 d, the two sets of samples exhibited a distinct separation tendency in the PLS-DA model. The model underwent rigorous permutation testing (Fig.  1 e) and proved to be significantly predictive and unfitted (Q 2  < 0). In order to identify the DEMs, the log 2  [FC] was set to 1.5 and a total of 909 differential positive ions (up-regulated positive ions: 495, down-regulated positive ions: 414) and 678 differential negative ions (up-regulated negative ions: 460, down-regulated negative ions: 218) were screened (Figs.  1 f and  1 g). The heatmap is a visualisation tool that utilises colour changes (red: up-regulated ions, blue: down-regulated ions) to depict the trend of metabolite ion expression in the sample. Furthermore, the investigation revealed that the trend of differences in each metabolic fraction was essentially the same between the two groups (Fig.  1 h). Following the screening of metabolite ions, the KEGG pathway annotation revealed that the differential ions were still concentrated in the human metabolic pathways, especially in 2-oxocarboxylic acid metabolism (KEGG: hsa01210), biosynthesis of amino acids (KEGG: hsa01230) and glycerophospholipid metabolism (KEGG: hsa00564) (Fig.  1 i).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   ( a ) HMDB classification annotation of 71,786 metabolite ions for DVT patients (V,  n  = 32) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 30). ( b ) KEGG enrichment pathway map of 71,786 metabolite ions for DVT patients (V,  n  = 32) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 30). ( c ) PCA plot for DVT patients (V,  n  = 32) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 30). ( d ) PLS-DA score map for DVT patients (V,  n  = 32) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 30). ( e ) PLS-DA displacement test chart. Volcano plot ( f ) and histogram ( g ) of 1587 differential metabolite ions for DVT patients (V,  n  = 32) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 30) (red: up-regulated ions, green: down-regulated ions). ( h ) Heatmap of 1587 differential metabolite ions for DVT patients (V,  n  = 32) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 30). ( i ) KEGG pathway annotation map of 1587 differential metabolite ions for DVT patients (V,  n  = 32) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 30). The size of the bubble is representative of the number of enriched ions Identification and integrative analysis of DEGs   Concurrently, analogous to the outcomes of metabolomic analysis, PCA results demonstrate that the samples exhibit intragroup disparities and that these disparities are more pronounced between the groups (Fig.  2 a). In order to identify DEGs, the log 2  [FC] threshold was set to 0.8, which resulted in the identification of 193 statistically significant genes, comprising 106 up-regulated genes and 87 down-regulated genes (Figs.  2 b and  2 c). Among these, RPS4Y1, HECTD4, DDX3Y, RBFOX2, SLC39A11, CCDC171 and TEX14 emerged as key genes with significant analytical value. In order to achieve a comprehensive comprehension of the biological pathways associated with DEGs, a combination of GO analysis and KEGG enrichment analysis was employed to identify the phospholipase D signalling pathway (KEGG: hsa04072), mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling pathway (KEGG: hsa04150) and intramembrane lipid transporter activity (GO: 0140303) (Figs.  2 d and  2 e). These findings provide a foundation for subsequent studies investigating the pathological mechanism of DVT. In order to further elucidate the intricate interactions among DEGs and clarify their connections to signalling pathways and metabolic processes, the aforementioned genes were sought to be identified in the STRING and subsequently a comprehensive protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using Cytoscape (Fig.  2 f). The results of the visualisation process revealed PIK3R1, LY96, CD36, DDX58, CCR2 and TNFSF10 as the most prominent genes in the network. Furthermore, topological analysis using 3 network algorithms indicated that PIK3R1 exhibited strong interactions with all other genes, consistent with the findings from the previous enrichment analysis (Fig.  2 g). The preceding exhaustive examination signifies the transcriptomic characteristics linked to DVT. Moreover, it has established a framework for subsequent collaborative analysis.   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   ( a ) PCA plot for DVT patients (V,  n  = 11) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 6). ( b ) Volcano plot of 193 DEGs for DVT patients (V,  n  = 11) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 6) (blue: up-regulated genes, red: down-regulated genes). ( c ) Heatmap of 193 DEGs for DVT patients (V,  n  = 11) and healthy subjects (E,  n  = 6) (red: up-regulated genes, blue: down-regulated genes). ( d ) The GO enrichment analysis plot of 193 DEGs. This includes the biological processes (BP), cellular components (CC) and molecular functions (MF) respectively. ( e ) KEGG enrichment pathway and annotation diagram of 193 DEGs. The size of the bubble is representative of the number of enriched genes. ( f ) The PPI network plot with 193 DEGs after the STRING database analysis. ( g ) The network diagrams of the top 25 hub genes determined by each of the 3 network algorithms (significance increases with redder color), including degree, radiality and stress Combined analysis of the two omics based on O2PLS and ML   The large number of reproducible results for the non-targeted metabolomics ions was indicative of a robust analytical process, and consequently, 1587 differential ions were identified by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). This was followed by the selection of only 85 specific metabolites that were precisely matched for further analysis. The O2PLS model was then employed to elucidate the interaction between the multi-omics. The common variation between all 193 DEGs and 85 DEMs was explored in depth. The association part explained 54.4% of the total metabolite variation and 72.1% of the total gene variation. Of these, the metabolome association and orthogonal part explained 74.2% of the total metabolome variation, and the transcriptome association and orthogonal part explained 79.9% of the total transcriptome variation (Fig.  3 a). Furthermore, based on the results of the component loadings, the top two dimensions of the squared loadings and the top 25 ranked metabolites and genes were filtered out and the associated loadings plots of the multi-omics were integrated to show their respective correlations, mainly including SLC39A11, SOCS1, ASMT, TEX14, ATP8A2, creatine, citraconic acid, vulgarone A and PI (Fig.  3 b).   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   ( a ) O2PLS loadings plot for metabolomics (left) and transcriptomics (right). ( b ) Correlation loadings plot of the two omics (blue: metabolomics, red: transcriptomics). ( c ) Correlation network diagram of 85 DEMs (red: positive correlation, blue: negative correlation). The correlation increases with the size of the bubble. ( d ) Correlation network diagram of 193 DEGs (red: positive correlation, blue: negative correlation). The correlation increases with the size of the bubble. ( e ) Correlation network diagram between two omics groups. The significance increases with redder color. ( f ) Correlation network diagram of top 15 DEMs and DEGs between two omics groups. The significance increases with redder color. Box plot ( g ) and reverse accumulation distribution map ( h ) of the residuals of the ML model for metabolomics. ( i ) ROC curve of the ML model for metabolomics. ( j ) Ranking map of metabolite importance of ML model. Box plot ( k ) and reverse accumulation distribution map ( l ) of the residuals of the ML model for transcriptomics. ( m ) ROC curve of the ML model for transcriptomics. ( n ) Ranking map of gene importance of ML model In order to demonstrate intra-omics correlations, the screening process was performed according to a pre-established Spearman’s coefficient threshold. This method enabled the strong interactions between metabolites and other metabolites to be displayed in a network plot, primarily PI, diatrizoate, vulgarone A, creatine, 3-furoic acid and 2