>Materials and methods   Experimental zebrafish and maintenance   This study was conducted under institutional approvals [Regierungspräsidium Tübingen No.1627; Tierforschungszentrum (TFZ) Ulm University No. z.183], and in compliance with EU Directive 2010/63/EU. All experiments were performed in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines and relevant institutional regulations. Zebrafish (Danio rerio) care and breeding were carried out as previously described ( 18 ). Microinjection and  washc3 -knockout zebrafish line generation by CRISPR/Cas9 system   Morpholino-modified antisense oligonucleotides (MO) targeting the splice doner site of the exon2-intron 2 was designed (Gene Tools, LLC, Oregon, USA), while a Standard Control MO (Ctrl MO) was used at the same concentration as a negative control (MO- washc3 : 5′-TGACTGTAAGATGAACAAACCTCCT-3′, Ctrl MO: 5′-CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA-3′). Morpholino doses (250 μM and 500 μM) were selected to assess dose dependency while avoiding overt non-specific toxicity and were subsequently referred to as MO-low and MO-high, respectively. CRISPR/Cas9 technology was employed to generate  washc3  knockout lines, with 400 ng/µL recombinant Cas9 protein (Euphoria GmbH, Germany) co-injected alongside 130 ng/µL a synthetic trans-activating crRNA (tracrRNA: AAACAGCAUAGCAAGUUAAAAUAAGGCUAGUCCGUUAUCAACUUGAAAAAGUGGCACCGAGUCGGUGCU) (Eurofins Genomics, Germany) and gene-specific crRNA (UCUACUCCUGAUCCCACAAUGUUUUAGAGCUAUGCUG UUUUG) (Eurofins Genomics, Germany) targeting  washc3  exon 1, diluted in 200 mM KCl resulted  washc3 -deficient line. Unless otherwise specified, MO injections were carried out using the TüAB wildtype strain and, microinjections were performed at the one-cell stage of fertilized zebrafish oocytes. Both morpholino-mediated knockdown and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout were used to compare early developmental requirements with post-developmental loss-of-function outcomes. Western blot assays   Protein extractions for immunoblotting were gained from 72 hpf embryo, 1-year-old adult zebrafish heart, and shRNA transduced AC16 cell, respectively. Collected embryos (∼50) were deyolked and washed before homogenization with pestles, and TNN lysis buffer used for protein extraction form embryo. For adult heart and AC16 cell, we used RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor. After incubation on ice for 1 h, all samples were centrifuged at 18,000 g for 15 min in 4 °C. Bradford assay was used for measuring protein concentration. 10–15 µg of protein in 5× Laemmli buffer were boiled for denaturation and samples loaded on precast 8%–16% SDS gels (BIO-RAD, Hercules, CA, USA) for separation. Proteins were transferred on polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes using the Trans-Blot Turbo System (BIO-RAD, USA). Membranes were blocked in SuperBlock Blocking Buffer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Membranes were incubated in diluted (1:1,000) primary antibody with blocking buffer at 4 °C overnight (ON). After washing with TBST (Tris-buffered saline, 0.05% Tween 20) for 1 h at RT, membranes were incubated with the corresponding anti-rabbit or ant-mouse secondary antibody conjugated to HRP (dilution 1:5,000 in SuperBlock) for 1 h at RT and washed again with TBST for an hour. Membranes were developed using Pierce ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and a luminescent image analyzer (LI-COR Biosciences GmbH, Germany). Anti-WASHC3/CCDC53 (Rabbit; Cat# 24445-1-AP, Proteintech, IL, USA), Anti- α -Tubulin (mouse, Cat# GTX628802, GeneTex, CA, USA). All replicates used for the quantification were from seven independent experiments. Immunofluorescence staining   The whole mount immunofluorescence of muscle tissue in embryo, we adapted a published protocol ( 19 ). Briefly, embryos were treated with 0.003% PTU (1-phenyl-2-thriourea) in E3 media before 24 hpf to inhibit pigmentation and changed every day until the termination of experiment. Collected embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for overnight at 4 °C and washed with PBSTw (PBS + 0.1% Tween-20). Embryos incubated for 5 min in 150 mM Tris-HCL pH 9.0 at RT and heated at 70 °C for 15 min. For permeabilization, we incubated embryos with 0.1 μM/mL Proteinase K in PBSTw for 50 min and fixed again with 4% PFA at RT. All washing step in between for permeabilization performed with PBSTw. Embryos were incubated in Blocking buffer (10% sheep serum, 0.8% Triton X-100% and 1% BSA in PBSTw) for 4 h at 4 °C on a rocking platform. Primary and secondary antibody diluted in Buffer I (1% sheep serum, 0.8% Triton X-100% and 1% BSA in PBSTw) for 48 h at 4 °C and washed with PBST-TS (10% sheep serum, 1% Triton X-100 in PBS) before and after primary and secondary antibody incubation. DAPI was applied with secondary antibody and visualized using confocal microscopy. Anti-Tropomyosin (CH1, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA, USA), Alexa 488 goat anti-mouse IgG2 (Cat# A-21121, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). Images were acquired using Confocal Microscopy.   Immunostaining of MF20 (MF20 concentrate, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA, USA) and S46 (S46 concentrate, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA, USA) was performed fixed embryos with Dent's Fixative (20% DMSO in MeOH) for overnight at RT. Next day Dent's Fixative changed to Dent's Bleach (10% H 2 O 2 , 20% DMSO in MeOH) for overnight at RT. Embryos were rehydrated using a descending MeOH row [75% MeOH, 50% MeOH and 25% MeOH in PBT (PBS+0.1% Tween)] for 20 min each at RT. 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) in PBDT (1% DMSO, 0.1% Tween in PBS) was used for the blocking buffer for 90 min. Primary MF20 (1:10 dilution in 1.5% FCS/PBDT) and S46 (1:50 dilution in 1.5% FCS/PBDT) antibodies were stained for overnight at 4 °C, respectively. Before and after primary and secondary antibody incubation, we washed embryos with 1.5% FCS/PBDT for 2 h. Hearts were dissected and mounted with VECTASHIELD® with DAPI and images were acquired using Confocal Microscopy. Aged zebrafish whole mount hematoxylin & eosin staining   Aged zebrafish were fixed in 4%PFA for 7 days at 4 °C and washed twice with PBS for 30 min. Fish were incubated in decalcification solution (20% EDTA pH 8.0 in DEPC treated water) for 10 days at RT and washed twice with DEPC treated water for 20 min. Fish were imbedded in Paraffin and sectioned. Sections were stained with Hematoxylin & Eosin and visualized by Zeiss Axioskop 2 plus (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany). RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR   For the extraction of mRNA from  washc3 +/+ ,  washc3 +/− , and  washc3 −/−  fish, 20–25 embryos collected in each group at 72 hpf, and adult hearts were harvested from fish and directly proceed to the RNA extraction. According to the provided protocol, we extracted mRNA with the RNeasy® Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and acquired mRNA were quantified using NANO drop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). By using 1 µg of mRNA, cDNA was synthesized using Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Quantitative real-time PCR analysis using SYBR-Green master mix (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) according to protocols on a Light Cycler® 96 (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Sequences of the used primers can be found in the  Supplementary Tables S1 . Birefringence analysis   Birefringence analysis was performed following a previous published protocol ( 20 ). Shorty, images were taken of embryos at 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpf under the Zeiss Axio Zoom V1.6 (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany) microscope. Embryos were oriented in the 3% methylcellulose to prevent the movement while image taking. Birefringence intensity was quantified with ImageJ (version 1.53, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA,  https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/ ) by measuring mean gray value in selected skeletal muscle area. Quantitative assessment of embryonic cardiac function   Videos for assessing fractional shortening and heart rate were recorded using a Leica DM IL LED microscope (Leica Biostystems, Nussloch, Germany). Cardiac contractility of the embryos was evaluated by measuring the diastolic and systolic lumen areas at 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpf, as previously described ( 21 ). Touch evoked response assay   Based on a previously established protocol ( 20 ), to assess the responsiveness of zebrafish embryos to mechanical stimulation, embryos at 48, 72, and 120 hpf were gently stimulated using the tip of a fine needle. A prompt and directed escape response was considered indicative of normal reactivity. For quantitative analysis, the velocity and acceleration of the embryos were measured. Embryos were individually positioned at the center of a petri dish, stimulated with a needle, and their responses were recorded at 60 frames per second. Video recordings were subsequently analyzed using Tracker Video Analysis software (version 6.2.0; Open-Source Physics, Davidson College, USA;  https://physlets.org/tracker/ ). Proteomic analysis   Sample preparation   Hearts were collected from 1-year-old adult zebrafish. Heart samples were homogenized using a tissue grinder (Cat# 947820B, Kisker Biotech, Germany) in 8 M Urea lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA) and incubated on ice for 1 h. Samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. Cleared supernatants were subjected to determine protein concentration using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Each samples contained 40 μg of extracted protein and were precipitated using the Chloroform/Methanol method. Protein extracts were digested using the SP3 method with some modifications ( 22 ). Magnetic bead-based sample preparation was carried out using a prototype magnetic bead slurry (Promega, Cat. #916738, Madison, WI, USA). For each sample, 2 µL of Promega magnetic beads (100 mg/mL) were added and mixed with the protein solution by gentle pipetting. Protein binding was induced by the addition of 800 µL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN), resulting in a final concentration of 80% ACN. Samples were vortexed for 15–30 s to ensure homogeneity and incubated for 20 min at 24 °C with shaking at 1,000 g. Following incubation, samples were briefly centrifuged to collect liquid from the tube lid and then placed on a magnetic rack to separate the beads. The supernatant was removed and discarded. Bound proteins were washed three times with 1 mL of 80% ethanol and once with 1 mL of 80% ACN. Beads were collected on the magnetic rack, the wash solution was completely removed, and the beads were air-dried for 1 min. Beads were reconstituted in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5. Trypsin was added in a ratio of 1:50, followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Samples were acidified using TFA to reach pH < 2. The pH of each sample was verified to be <2 before proceeding to StageTip desalting and LC-MS analysis. Digested proteins were desalted on self-assembled C18 Empore® extraction discs (3 M, Maplewood, MN, USA) ( 23 ). LC-MS/MS analysis and data processing   Samples were suspended in 0.1% TFA and analyzed using an Ultimate 3,000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap QE HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) as described before ( 24 ). Briefly, peptides were separated in a 120 min linear gradient starting from 3% B and increasing to 23% B over 100 min and to 38% B over 20 min, followed by washout with 95% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. MS spectra (m/z 400–1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution and MS2 spectra were generated for up to 15 precursors with a normalized collision energy of 27 and an isolation width of 1.4 m/z. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt Danio rerio UP000814640 (August 2022), and a customized contaminant database using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 with Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da and the parent ion mass tolerance to 5 ppm. Trypsin was specified as an enzyme. The following variable modifications were allowed: Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N, Q), Acetylation (N-term), Met-loss (M), Met-loss + Acetyl (N-Term), whereas Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Peptide quantification was done using a precursor ion quantifier node with the Top N Average ( n  = 3) method set for protein abundance calculation. Data processing   Perseus software (version 2.0.11, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany;  https://maxquant.net/perseus/ ) was used for processing the result of proteomic analysis. All values were log2 transformed and filtered rows based on all three values identified at least one group. Missing values were replaced from a normal distribution for each replicate and differentially expressed proteins verified by ANOVA (Threshold,  p   <   0.05 ). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD062550. Cell culture and adeno-associated virus transduction   AC16 cells (human ventricular cardiomyocytes) were cultured in DMEM/F12 GlutaMax medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with 12.5% fetal calf serum (FCS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO 2 . Culture medium was changed every 48 h and when cells reached confluence, cells were passaged using 0.05% trypsin and 0.02% EDTA. For the AAV virus transduction, we used 50,000 Multiplicity of Infection (MOI) and calculated volume of virus was mixed with serum and antibiotics free medium and treated for 24 h to transduce viruses into AC16. Medium with 6.5% FCS and 1% was changed and incubated at least 48 h for further experiments. Extraction of primary cardiomyocyte and seahorse assay   Isolation of primary cardiomyocyte from adult zebrafish was performed according to a previous established protocol ( 25 ). To obtain a sufficient number of cells for Seahorse assays, three to four hearts were collected per experimental group. The extracted primary cardiomyocytes, along with AAV-shRNA-transduced AC16 cells, were seeded into a Seahorse XF96 cell culture plate with appropriate medium in each well. Measurements were conducted following standardized protocols as previously described ( 26 ). Heart cryosection RNA scope   Heart dissected from aged zebrafish were fixed in 4% PFA with sucrose at RT for 1 h. After fixation, the hearts were washed in wash buffer (0.1 M phosphate buffer containing 4% sucrose) and incubated overnight at 4 °C in 0.1 M phosphate buffer containing 30% sucrose. The samples were then embedded in tissue freezing medium (Leica Biostystems, Nussloch, Germany), and cryosectioned at a thickness 10 μm using a cryotome (CM1950, Leica Biostystems, Nussloch, Germany). For RNA Scope analysis, sections were refixed with 4% PFA, washed with PBS, and subjected to a rehydration procedure using a graded ethanol series. hHydrogen peroxide and Protease IV were used for tissue digestion. Prewarmed probes were applied to sections and hybridize for 2 h at 40 °C. Hybridized sections were then incubated sequentially with AMP1 through AMP3 buffers for signal amplification, followed by incubation with RNAscope Multiplex FL V2 HRP and blocker for signal detection. All reagents were obtained from the RNAscope™ Wash Buffer Reagents kit, RNAscope™ H 2 O 2  and Protease Reagents and RNAscope™ Multiplex Fluorescent Detection Reagents v2 (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, CA, USA). Statistical analysis   Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 9 software. Mann–Whitney or unpaired  t -test were used for the comparisons of 2 groups, and Kruskal–Wallis's test or one-way ANOVA were used for the comparisons of 3 groups depending on the result of the normality test. Parameters of all tests were two-tailed, statistical significance at  p   <   0.05  and results are represented as mean with standard deviation (SD) except OCR and ECAR curve displayed as mean with standard error of the mean (SEM). Results   Knockdown of  washc3  induces neuromuscular defects and impairs heart function during early development in zebrafish   Given that knockdown of the WASH complex subunits Washc5 and Washc4 has previously been shown to impact skeletal muscle, cardiac, and neuronal development in zebrafish embryos ( 2 ,  9 ), we used morpholino (MO)-modified antisense oligonucleotides (MOs) to investigate the developmental role of Washc3 in zebrafish. To evaluate whether phenotypes scale with knockdown strength, we analyzed embryos injected with two morpholino doses (MO-low and MO-high). We injected wild-type embryos with a morpholino-modified antisense oligonucleotide (MO) targeting the splice donor site at the exon 2-intron 2 junction of the  washc3  gene. Knockdown efficiency and specificity were assessed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) followed by sequencing. Injection of 500 μM  washc3 -specific MO (MO-high) induced an aberrant splice variant lacking 39 base pairs at the end of exon 2, resulting in near-complete disruption of endogenous wild-type  washc3  transcript expression ( Figure 1A , supplementary Figure S1). Western blot analysis confirmed a substantial reduction in Washc3 protein levels in  washc3  morphants at 72 h post-fertilization (hpf) ( Figure 1C ). Phenotypic characterization up to 72 hpf revealed that  washc3  morphants with high morpholino concentration exhibited reduced body length, axial curvature, and mild pericardial edema compared to control MO-injected and MO-low embryos ( Figure 1B ). To assess cardiac function, we measured ventricular fractional shortening (FS) and heart rate at 72 hpf.  Washc3  morphants displayed a significant reduction in FS, while heart rate remained unaffected ( Figure 1D ). Structural analysis of cardiac development using the myocardial markers MF20 (meromyosin/myosin heavy chain) and S46 (atrial myosin heavy chain) revealed no defects in cardiomyocyte specification or differentiation upon  washc3  knockdown ( Figure 1E ).   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Knockdown of Washc3 in zebrafish embryo impairs neuromuscular development and cardiac function.  (A)  RT-PCR bands of  washc3  in control (ctrl) or  washc3  morpholino (MO) injected embryos at 72 h post-fertilization (hpf), validating MO against zebrafish  washc3  inducing deletion of 39 bp at the end of exon 2 via alternative splicing (MO-low: 250 μM of  washc3  MO; MO-high: 500 μM of  washc3  MO).  (B)  Phenotype ratios of ctrl or  washc3  morphants at 72 hpf (% of Normal, Heart edema, Skeletal muscle defect, Heart edema and skeletal muscle defect).  (C)  Immunoblots of Washc3 and α-Tubulin (a loading control) in ctrl or  washc3  morphants at 72 hpf. The blot intensity of Washc3 was normalized to α-Tubulin and fold change was calculated vs. ctrl morphants (SD,  n  = 7, Mann- Whitney test,  ***p   <   0.001  vs. Ctrl MO).  (D)  Lateral view of MO-injected embryos at 48 and 72 hpf in the images of brightfield (top panel) or birefringence (bottom panel) (scale bar: 500 µm). Magnified brightfield images of morphants' developing hearts showing unaffected cardiac phenotype by  washc3  MO at 72 hpf (scale bar: 50 µm). Quantified birefringence intensities, representing skeletal muscle development, were significantly decreased in  washc3  morphants at 48 and 72 hpf (SD,  n  = 9, Ordinary one-way ANOVA,  **p   <   0.005, ****p   <   0.0001  vs. Ctrl MO). Heart function was assessed by measuring ventricular fractional shortening (FS) area (SD,  n  = 9, Ordinary one-way ANOVA, ns = not significant,  **p   <   0.005  vs. Ctrl MO) and heart rate (bpm: beats per minute) (SD,  n  = 9, Ordinary one-way ANOVA, ns = not significant vs. Ctrl MO). At 72 hpf, cardiac contractility was significantly reduced in  washc3  MO-high injected embryos.  (E)  Immunofluorescence (IF) staining of chamber-specific myosin heavy chain staining (MF20: ventricle and atrium, S46: atrium) for defining chamber specification and differentiation of morphants at 72 hpf (scale bar: 50 μm).  (F)  Confocal projections of morphants stained with Tropomyosin (green) and DAPI (blue) at 48 hpf (scale bar: 10 μm).  (G)  Representative confocal images visualizing the motor neuron in Tg( mnx1 :mGFP) embryos injected with ctrl or  washc3  MO at 72 hpf. Statistical analyses revealed significantly decreased quantification of distance of adjacent motor neuron (SD,  n  = 9; Unpaired  t -test,  **p   <   0.005  vs. Ctrl MO) and length of each CaP axon (SD,  n  = 9, Unpaired  t -test,  **p   <   0.005  vs. Ctrl MO), but number of branches per CaP axon (SD,  n  = 9; ns = not significant vs. Ctrl MO) was not affected by MO-mediated knockdown of Washc3.  (H)  Overlaid swim paths of MO-injected embryos from touch evoked escape response assay demonstrates deteriorated motility of  washc3  morphants at 72 hpf. Statistical analyses of maximum velocity (m/s, SD; Ctrl MO,  n  = 20; MO-high,  n  = 28; Unpaired  t -test,  ****p   <   0.0001  vs. Ctrl MO), maximum acceleration (m/s2, SD; Ctrl MO,  n  = 20; MO-high,  n  = 29; Mann–Whitney test, ns = not significant vs. Ctrl MO), total swim distance (m, SD; Ctrl MO,  n  = 18; MO-high,  n  = 24; Mann–Whitney test,  ****p   <   0.0001  vs. Ctrl MO), and swim distance within 200 ms (m, SD; Ctrl,  n  = 20; MO-high,  n  = 29; Unpaired  t -test,  ***p   <   0.001  vs. Ctrl MO). Based on prior findings involving other WASH complex subunits such as Washc4 and Washc5, we hypothesized that  washc3  knockdown may also impair neuromuscular development and embryo motility. First, skeletal muscle integrity was first evaluated using birefringence analysis. Birefringence intensity was significantly reduced in  washc3  morphants at 48 and 72 hpf, indicating severely disrupted myofibrillar organization. Whole-mount immunofluorescence of 48 hpf embryos stained for Tropomyosin confirmed aberrant muscle fiber architecture, with wavy and disrupted fibers observed in  washc3  morphants, as opposed to the parallel, tightly packed fibers seen in controls ( Figure 1F ). Next, we analyzed the effects of  washc3  knockdown on motor neuron morphology in the Tg( mnx1 :mGFP) transgenic line ( 27 ), focusing on caudal primary (CaP) motor neurons to assess motor neuron development ( 28 ).  washc3  knockdown resulted in reduced intersomitic distance between adjacent motor neurons and shortened CaP axons, whereas axonal branching was preserved ( Figure 1G ). To functionally assess neuromuscular development, we performed a touch-evoked escape response assay at 72 hpf.  washc3  morphants demonstrated significantly reduced maximum swim velocity, total swim distance, and swim distance within the initial 200 ms post-stimulation, while maximum acceleration remained unchanged ( Figure 1H ). These results indicate impaired neuromuscular structure and function during early development.   Taken together, these data indicate that Washc3, like the WASH complex components Washc4 and Washc5, is critical for both cardiac and skeletal muscle development, further supporting the essential role of the WASH complex in orchestrating early vertebrate development. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of  washc3  causes transient striated muscle defects in zebrafish embryos   To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying Washc3-mediated regulation of cardiac and neuromuscular function, we generated a stable  washc3  knockout (KO) zebrafish line via CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. As shown in  Figure 2A , a 15-base pair insertion in exon 1 of the  washc3  gene introduced a premature stop codon, predicted to produce a truncated and non-functional Washc3 protein. Sequencing of genomic DNA from individual embryos confirmed the presence of this insertion by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ( Figure 2B ). To determine the consequences of  washc3  deletion at both transcriptional and protein levels, we analyzed  washc3  mRNA and Washc3 protein expression in homozygous  washc3 −/−  mutants. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) revealed an unexpected increase in  washc3  transcript levels, whereas Western blot analysis confirmed complete absence of Washc3 protein in  washc3 −/−  embryos ( Figures 2C,D ), thereby validating the generation of a loss-of-function mutant suitable for subsequent downstream analyses.   Figure 2.