>Methods   Cell culture   Human lung cancer cell lines A549 and PC-9 were purchased from the Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China). A549 cells were cultured in F-12K medium (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and PC-9 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco). Both basal media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were incubated in a humidified atmosphere at 37 ℃ with a 5% CO 2  atmosphere. For hypoxia experiments, cells were cultured under 1% oxygen conditions. Isolation of exosomes from medium and plasma   Exosomes were isolated through differential centrifugation. Briefly, cell culture supernatants or plasma samples were first centrifuged at 300 ×g and then at 2,000 ×g to remove cells and cellular debris. The resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 10,000 ×g to eliminate shedding vesicles and other larger-sized vesicles. Finally, the supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 ×g for 70 minutes. All centrifugation steps were performed at 4 ℃. The exosome pellet was harvested and then resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for subsequent experiments. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) assay   For TEM analysis, exosome pellets were resuspended in 2.5% glutaraldehyde and fixed overnight at 4 ℃. Samples were then postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide at room temperature (RT), embedded in 10% gelatin, and refixed in glutaraldehyde at 4 ℃. The gelatin-embedded samples were cut into small blocks (<1 mm 3 ). Following dehydration through a graded ethanol series (30%, 50%, 70%, 90%, 95%, and 100%, with three changes in each step), samples were infiltrated with propylene oxide and gradually embedded in Quetol-812 epoxy resin (Nisshin EM, Japan). Ultrathin sections (100 nm) were prepared with a UC6 ultramicrotome (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for 5 min each at RT, and examined under a Tecnai T20 transmission electron microscope (FEI Company, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating at 120 kV. PKH26 staining for exosomes   Exosome membranes were labeled with PKH26 red fluorescent cell linker kits (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, exosomes were resuspended in 100 µL of diluent C. A dye solution (4×10 −6  M) was prepared through the addition of 0.4 µL of PKH26 ethanolic dye solution to 100 µL of diluent C. The exosome suspension (100 µL) was mixed with the dye solution (100 µL) through gentle pipetting. After 1–5 min of incubation with periodic mixing, the staining reaction was terminated by the addition of 200 µL of serum followed by 1 minute of incubation. Stained exosomes were washed twice with 1× PBS and resuspended in fresh PBS in sterile conical polypropylene tubes. Establishment of stable cell lines   Lentiviral vectors encoding circ-UBR5 overexpression,  HNRNPR  overexpression, HNRNPR short hairpin RNA (shRNA) for knockdown, and their corresponding control vectors were purchased from Genechem (Shanghai, China). For lentivirus production, the target lentiviral vectors were cotransfected with packaging plasmids psPASX2 and pMD2.G at the recommended ratio into 293T cells (at 90% confluence) via Lenti-Pro Transfection Reagent (Shanghai Genechem, China). Viral supernatants were collected 48 hours after transfection and added to A549 or PC-9 cells. After 8 hours of incubation with the virus-containing medium, the medium was replaced with fresh medium containing 10% FBS. Stable cell lines were established through the selection of infected cells with puromycin starting 72 hours after infection to enrich for stably transduced cells. RNA isolation and quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction   Total RNA was extracted from cultured cells and tissues with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was reverse-transcribed from 500 ng of total RNA with the PrimeScript Reverse Transcriptase Reagent Kit (Takara Bio, Kusatsu, Japan). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed with SYBR Premix Ex TaqII (Takara Bio) on a Light Cycler 480 II real-time PCR system (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).  GAPDH  served as the internal reference gene, and the relative gene expression levels were calculated with the 2 −ΔΔCt  method. Primers were designed and synthesized by Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China), with the following sequences: 5'-AGGCAATGAATCAGCAGACAA-3' (has_circ_0085207/circ-UBR5, forward primer), 5'-GCAAGCCACAAGTTCGACACT-3' (has_circ_0085207/circ-UBR5, reverse primer); 5'-ATGTTCTTGACAGAGTGTCAGGTTC-3' (hsa_circ_0053754, forward primer), 5'-CTGGGGTTCGTTCACAATCTC-3' (hsa_circ_0053754, reverse primer); 5'-TCATTCACTTGAGGAGTGTCTGGTA-3' (hsa_circ_0005276, forward primer), 5'-CCTGGATACCATTTAGCATGTTGTT-3' (hsa_circ_0005276, reverse primer); 5'-ACGCCATCGAATCCGGAA-3' (hsa_circ_0000416, forward primer), and 5'-GGTCTAGAAACCAAATGTGAAGATG-3' (hsa_circ_0000416, reverse primer). Cell apoptosis flow cytometry   A549 and PC-9 were seeded in six-well plates at an appropriate initial density and incubated under hypoxic (1% O 2 ) or normoxic (21% O 2 ) conditions. After 12 hours, cells were harvested and stained with Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) for 15 min in the dark. Stained cells were analyzed with a flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). The percentage of early apoptotic cells was defined as the proportion of Annexin V-positive cells relative to the total cell proportion. Cell proliferation assay   Cellular proliferation was evaluated with Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8; Beyotime Biotechnology). Approximately 3×10 3  cells were seeded in 96-well plates and incubated for 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours in hypoxic or normoxic conditions. Ten microliters of CCK-8 solution was added to each well, and the plates were incubated at 37 ℃ for 1 hour. Absorbance at 450 nm was measured with an ELX-800 spectrometer reader (Bio-Tek Instruments, Winooski, VT, USA). Western blot analysis   Protein expression was assessed via Western blotting, with GAPDH used as the internal reference. Cells and tissues were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation (RIPA) buffer (Solarbio, Beijing, China) supplemented with fresh protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Total proteins were separated on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, USA). Membranes were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) at RT for 1 hour and then incubated overnight at 4 ℃ with the following primary antibodies: anti-CD63 (1:1,000; BD Bioscience, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), anti-CD9 (1:1,000; MilliporeSigma), anti-CD81 (1:1,800; Medix Biochemica, Espoo, Finland), anti-HNRNPR (1:500; Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA), and anti-GAPDH (1:3,000; Proteintech). After washing, membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies at RT for 1 hour. Protein bands were visualized with an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) kit (MilliporeSigma) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. ncRNA sequencing and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis   Total RNA was extracted from serum and plasma samples with a RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA integrity was assessed with a 2100 Bioanalyzer system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The extracted RNA was amplified and labeled with Cy3 with a Low Input Quick Amp Labeling Kit (Agilent), and the labeled RNA was purified via the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). For hybridization, 1.65 µg of Cy3-labeled RNA was applied to each microarray slide using the Gene Expression Hybridization Kit (Agilent) and incubated at 65 ℃ for 17 hours. After washing with the Gene Expression Wash Buffer Kit (Agilent), the slides were scanned using the SureScan DX microarray scanner (Agilent) at a 3-µm resolution. Raw data were extracted using Feature Extraction Software version 10.7 (Agilent) and subsequently processed for downstream analyses. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of coexpressed genes was performed using the R package “clusterProfiler”. Bioinformatics analysis and selection of candidate circRNAs in lung cancer   Raw microarray data were normalized using the quantile method implemented in the “limma” package in R. CircRNA expression profiles were extracted for subsequent analysis. Differentially expressed circRNAs between lung cancer patients and control samples were identified using “limma”, with an adjusted P value <0.05 and |log 2 fold change (FC)| above the predefined threshold. Differentially expressed circRNAs were ranked by log 2 FC and P values, and the top candidates were selected for further validation. Based on expression abundance, consistency across samples, and relevance to lung cancer-related pathways, circ-UBR5 was identified as one of the most significantly upregulated circRNAs and selected for subsequent experimental validation. Tissue samples and tissue microarray   Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) LUAD tissue samples were collected from patients who underwent surgical resection at Shanghai Chest Hospital (Shanghai, China) between January 2014 and January 2020. A tissue microarray containing 70 LUAD samples was constructed with 0.6-mm-diameter core being punched from the FFPE blocks, including both tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues. All samples were reviewed by experienced pathologists and handled in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent amendments. All related procedures were conducted with approval from the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Chest Hospital (No. KS22018) and informed consent was taken from all the patients.   In situ  hybridization and immunofluorescence   In situ  hybridization was performed with a commercial kit (Beyotime). Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min and washed with PBS. After digestion with 10 µg/mL proteinase K at RT for 10 min, samples were treated with 0.5-M HCl and acetylated with a freshly prepared acetylation solution. Fluorescent RNA probes were synthesized based on target sequences. Prehybridization was performed with hybridization buffer containing yeast RNA. Denatured probe-containing hybridization solution was applied to samples and incubated overnight in a humidified chamber. Posthybridization, stringent washes were performed with preheated washing buffers under light protection. For tissue microarray sections, immunofluorescence staining was performed via incubation with anti-HNRNPR antibody (1:500; Proteintech) and then with fluorescent secondary antibody. Nuclei were counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images were acquired with a fluorescence microscope. Fluorescence intensities of circ-UBR5 and HNRNPR were quantified with ImageJ software (US National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). The median fluorescence intensity was used as the cutoff: values above the median were defined as high expression and those below as low expression. Cell migration assay   Cell migration capacity was evaluated via wound-healing assay. A549 and PC-9 cells were seeded in six-well plates. After 24 hours, a 20-µL pipette tip was used to create two linear cell-free regions in each well. Medium containing 2% FBS was added, and cells were incubated under standard conditions. Images were captured at 0, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hours using inverted light microscope to dynamically monitor gap closure for assessment of wound closure. The migration area is calculated by the ratio of the scratched area to the field of view area by ImageJ. Cell invasion assay   Cell invasion was analyzed using Transwell chambers (Corning, Corning, NY, USA) in a 24-well plate. The lower chamber was filled with 600 µL of medium containing 10% FBS. The upper chamber was coated with precooled Matrigel (Corning), and 5×10 4  cells in 100 µL of serum-free medium were seeded into the upper chamber. After 24 hours of incubation, noninvading cells on the upper surface of the membrane were removed. Invading cells on the lower surface were fixed in 4% formaldehyde, stained with 0.1% crystal violet, air-dried, and imaged under a light microscope. Cells were counted in three randomly selected fields per membrane, and the average number of invading cells was calculated by ImageJ. RNA pulldown assay and mass spectrometry   A549 and PC-9 were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed in 500 µL of lysis buffer [20 mM of Tris-HCl at pH 7.0, 150 mM of NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, and 5 mM of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)] supplemented with 1 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and 0.4 U/µL of RNase inhibitor. Lysates were incubated with 3 µg of biotinylated DNA oligonucleotide probes targeting endogenous or ectopically expressed circ-UBR5 at 4 ℃ for 2 hours. Subsequently, 50 µL of Dynabeads MyOne streptavidin C1 magnetic beads (Invitrogen) were added to each reaction and incubated at 4 ℃ for another 2 hours. The beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, and bound proteins were analyzed via Western blotting. For mass spectrometry, pulled-down proteins were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (Tiangen Biotech, Beijing, China). Gel bands were excised and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for protein identification.   The probe sequences were as follows: circ-UBR5-biotin, UUCGACACUCAAAAAUAUCUUUGAUUGGUGUCAUCAUCA; and circ-NC-biotin, UAUCACGUAGCCGUUGCAUUUGCCGUAGCCCUGUGGGCC. RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP)   A549 and PC-9 cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (20 mM of Tris-HCl at pH 7.0, 150 mM of NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 5 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1 mM of DTT, 1 mM of PMSF, and 0.4 U/µL of RNase inhibitor. Lysates were incubated with 5 µg of primary antibody at 4 ℃ for 2 hours, which was followed by the addition of 50 µL of Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dalla, TX, USA) and incubation at 4 ℃ for 4 hours. The beads were washed with PBS, and bound RNA was extracted with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). Isolated RNA was subject to qRT-PCR to detect the target sequences of specific primers. Statistical analysis   Data processing and statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 9 (Dotmatics, Boston, MA, USA) and R version 4.2.1 software. Results are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) from at least three independent experiments, each performed in triplicate. Continuous variables are expressed as the mean ± SD or median with the interquartile range (IQR). Statistical significance was determined via the Student  t -test, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, Mann-Whitney test, and one-way analysis of variance as appropriate. Pearson correlation analysis and simple linear regression were used to determine the coefficient of determination (R 2 ). Survival differences were analyzed via Kaplan-Meier analysis with the log-rank test. Categorical variables were compared with the chi-squared test. Differences were considered statistically significant at P<0.05. Results   Hypoxia influenced tumor heterogeneity and drove exosome-mediated lung cancer metastasis   We observed that LUAD cells (A549 and PC-9) exhibited significantly increased proliferation ( Figure S1A ) and reduced basal apoptosis under hypoxic conditions (1% O 2 ) ( Figure S1B ), consistent with previous reports ( 40 , 41 ). Given that vascular abnormalities in solid tumors often result in heterogeneous oxygen distribution, we further investigated the influence of hypoxic LUAD cells on their normoxic counterparts. Conditioned media collected after 72 hours of hypoxic culture markedly enhanced the proliferation, migration, and invasion of normoxic LUAD cells compared with normoxic conditioned media ( Figure 1A-1C ), suggesting that hypoxic LUAD cells may secrete soluble factors that promote the metastatic potential of normoxic cells.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Hypoxic LUAD cells promoted proliferation and motility of normoxic LUAD cells via exosomes. (A) Cell viability and proliferation of normoxic LUAD cells treated with NM or HM were measured with the CCK-8 assay. (B) Transwell invasion assay was performed to assess the invasive capacity of LUAD cells treated with NM or HM. Invaded cells were stained with crystal violet for cell number counting. (C) Scratch wound-healing assay showing the migration ability of LUAD cells under different conditioned media treatments, observed using an inverted light microscope and calculating the migration area. (D) Western blot analysis of exosome markers in conditioned media from normoxic and hypoxic LUAD cells. (E) Exosomes were isolated from NM and HM, and their morphology was examined by TEM and NTA. (F) Uptake of PKH26-labeled exosomes by normoxic LUAD cells observed under fluorescence microscopy. (G) Cell viability and proliferation of LUAD cells treated with N- or H-exo cells as assessed by CCK-8 assay. (H) Transwell invasion assay of LUAD cells following treatment with N- or H-exo. Invaded cells were stained with crystal violet for cell number counting. (I) Scratch wound-healing assay showing the migration of normaxic LUAD cells treated with N- or H-exo at 0 and 72 h, observed using an inverted light microscope and calculating the migration area. *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01. CCK-8, Cell Counting Kit-8; DAPI, 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; H-exo, hypoxic exosomes; HM, hypoxic media; LUAD, lung adenocarcinoma; N-exo, normoxic exosomes; NM, normoxic media; NTA, nanoparticle tracking analysis; OD, optical density; TEM, transmission electron microscopy. Since EVs are critical mediators of intercellular communication, we isolated exosomes from the conditioned media of LUAD cells cultured under hypoxic or normoxic conditions ( Figure 1D ). TEM and nanoparticle tracking analysis confirmed the presence of exosomes and revealed distinct morphological differences between the two groups ( Figure 1E ). PKH26 labeling demonstrated that these exosomes could be internalized by LUAD cells, with some even localized in the nucleus ( Figure 1F ). When normoxic LUAD cells were cocultured with exosomes derived from hypoxic or normoxic cells, those treated with hypoxia-derived exosomes displayed significantly enhanced proliferation, migration, and invasion ( Figure 1G-1I ). Importantly, these effects were abrogated by the exosome secretion inhibitor GW4869 ( Figure S2 ). Collectively, these findings indicate that hypoxic LUAD cells can promote metastatic behavior in normoxic LUAD cells through exosome-mediated signaling. Hypoxic exosome-derived circ-UBR5 acted as a key prometastatic effector   ncRNAs play crucial biological roles in tumor initiation and progression and have emerged as promising therapeutic targets ( 42 ). Therefore, we focused on the potential role of certain ncRNA signals in exosomes in LUAD metastasis. Through ncRNA sequencing, we examined the exosomal RNA from culture media under hypoxic and normoxic conditions and identified 342 upregulated genes and 585 downregulated genes ( Figure 2A ). KEGG pathway analysis revealed that these differentially expressed genes were mainly enriched in pathways closely related to lung cancer metastasis, including NSCLC, focal adhesion, and adherens junction pathways ( Figure 2B ). circRNAs are endogenous covalently closed ncRNAs with high stability and are enriched in exosomes. circRNAs have been reported to specifically bind micro RNAs (miRNAs), mRNAs, or proteins and to regulate cellular functions through, for example, acting as “molecular sponges”, and thus contributing prominently to tumorigenesis and progression ( 43 ). Based on our ncRNA-sequencing results, we identified candidate circRNAs including circ-HUWE1, circ-UBR5, circ-ITCH, circ-BIRC6, circ-UBE2K, circ-UBE3A, circ-XIAP, and circ-MDM2 and then designed primers for qRT-PCR validation in cell lines ( Figure 2C ). Among these circRNAs, circ-UBR5 was significantly upregulated in hypoxia-treated exosomes and was resistant to ribonuclease (RNase) digestion ( Figure 2D ), suggesting a specific role of circ-UBR5 in hypoxic exosomes.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Hypoxic exosomes promoted oncogenic phenotypes of normoxic LUAD cells via circ-UBR5. (A) Volcano plot of noncoding RNA-sequencing data of exosomes derived from hypoxic versus normoxic LUAD cells. Genes with |log 2 (fold change)| ≥1 and P<0.05 were considered significantly differentially expressed. Red and blue dots represent up-regulated and down-regulated genes, respectively, while gray dots indicate non-significant genes. (B) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showing pathways related to tumor metastasis. (C) qRT-PCR validation of circRNA expression in hypoxic LUAD cells. (D) RNase R treatment assay confirming the circular structure of circ-UBR5. (E) Overexpression of circ-UBR5 in A549 cells via lentiviral infection. (F) CCK-8 assay showing proliferation of A549 cells in the control and circ-UBR5-overexpression groups. (G) Transwell invasion assay of A549 cells after circ-UBR5 overexpression. Invaded cells were stained with crystal violet for cell number counting. (H) Scratch wound-healing assay showing migration of A549 cells at 0 and 72 h, observed using an inverted light microscope and calculating the migration area. (I) Knockdown of circ-UBR5 in A549 cells via shRNA. (J) CCK-8 assay assessing the proliferation of A549 cells under indicated treatments: N-exo, exosomes from normoxic LUAD cells; H-exo, exosomes from hypoxic LUAD cells; shNC + H-exo, scramble shRNA + H-exo; shcirc-UBR5 + H-exo, circ-UBR5 knockdown shRNA + H-exo. (K) Transwell invasion assay of A549 cells under the indicated treatments. Invaded cells were stained with crystal violet for cell number counting. (L) Wound-healing assay showing migration of A549 cells at 0 and 72 h under the indicated treatments, observed using an inverted light microscope and calculating the migration area. *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; ns, not significant. CCK-8, Cell Counting Kit-8; H-exo, hypoxic exosomes; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; LUAD, lung adenocarcinoma; N-exo, normoxic exosomes; OD, optical density; OE, overexpression; qRT-PCR, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction; shNC, short hairpin negative control; shRNA, short hairpin RNA. To evaluate its biological function, we overexpressed circ-UBR5 in normoxic LUAD cell lines. Using lentiviral vectors, we successfully overexpressed circ-UBR5 in A549 cells ( Figure 2E ) and found that circ-UBR5 overexpression promoted cell proliferation ( Figure 2F ), migration, and invasion ( Figure 2G,2H ), mimicking the effects of hypoxic exosome treatment. Conversely, silencing circ-UBR5 with shRNA abolished the promotive effect of hypoxic exosomes on normoxic cells ( Figure 2I-2L ). These results were further confirmed in PC9 cells ( Figure S3 ). Taken together, our findings indicate that circ-UBR5 is a key prometastatic effector in hypoxic exosomes in LUAD. circ-UBR5 bound and activated HNRNPR to drive LUAD cell metastasis   To further investigate the downstream mechanism by which circ-UBR5 exerts its effects in normoxic LUAD cells, we performed RNA pulldown and then mass spectrometry analysis. The circ-UBR5 probe captured 56 specific proteins ( Figure 3A,3B ). Functional enrichment analysis indicated that these differential proteins were significantly enriched in pathways related to ribosome function and RNA splicing ( Figure 3C ). RNPs are functional complexes formed by RNA molecules and specific proteins through noncovalent interactions and are involved in all RNA-related cellular processes. hnRNPs mainly regulate nucleic acid metabolism and posttranscriptional gene expression by binding nucleic acids, thereby contributing to alternative splicing, mRNA stability, and transcriptional and translational regulation ( 44 ). Due to these functions, hnRNPs have attracted considerable attention in cancer research ( 31 , 36 , 45 ). HNRNPR, a member of the hnRNP family, has been identified as a critical oncogenic splicing factor ( 37 ). Western blot analysis in our study confirmed that circ-UBR5 and HNRNPR interact ( Figure 3D ). Moreover, overexpression of circ-UBR5 in LUAD cell lines induced upregulation of  HNRNPR , suggesting that HNRNPR may act as a downstream protein specifically bound by circ-UBR5 ( Figure 3E ). These findings were further validated by RIP experiments ( Figure 3F ). Subcellular localization by immunofluorescence revealed that circ-UBR5 and HNRNPR colocalize in the nucleus, indicating potential nuclear interaction ( Figure 3G ). Functional rescue experiments demonstrated that circ-UBR5 ov