>Methods   Meat floss sample preparation   Three different meat floss materials (i.e., beef, chicken, and pork) were used and processed separately in this study. The materials (meats) were purchased at a traditional market in Sleman, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. All breeds of meats were obtained from the local Indonesian animal species that were ready to be consumed by humans. The meats were taken from local chickens, cows, and pigs that had ages of 45–75 days, 2–4 years, and 4–6 months, respectively. The selected parts were pure meats (only meat cuts without muscles), where neither fat nor bone was added into the composition. For chicken, the pure meats were originally from two body parts (breast and thigh), which were divided into five pieces. For beef and pork, the pure meats were loin cuts, which were divided into four pieces.   The meat cuts were processed to form meat flosses in the laboratory located at the Faculty of Animal Science, Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM), Yogyakarta. Meat flosses were carefully prepared. Each type of meat (beef, chicken, or pork) with a weight of 500 g was boiled and shredded to form fibers. The shredded meat was fried to dry, in which afterward a spinner was used to remove the water in the obtained meat floss. This process resulted in fried meat floss containing either pure beef, chicken, or pork. Thus, there was no floss product comprising mixed meats in this case.   After their production processes, the meat flosses were prepared as the samples for three different tests (i.e., e-nose, FTIR, and GC-MS). First, for e-nose assessment, we employed a total number of 300 meat floss samples (i.e., 100 samples of beef meat floss, 100 samples of chicken meat floss, and 100 samples of pork meat floss), where each sample has a weight of 2.0 g measured by a TL Series digital scale (a professional digital mini scale with a capacity of 50 g). We characterized 100 samples for each meat floss variant (total weight of 200 g) to provide sufficient data for learning-based classification and to ensure the reliability of the analyzed data. The e-nose measurements of meat floss samples were carried out at room temperature. Second, for FTIR preparation, we used KBr pellets at room temperature using spectrophotometer FTIR Shimadzu Prestige 21. Here, for each meat floss type, we prepared samples with a total weight of 150 g for FTIR measurement. Third, to enable the GC-MS measurement for identifying the volatile compounds in meat flosses, the samples were extracted with methanol. For the GC-MS test, we prepared 150 g of sample for each meat floss type. E-nose setup for meet floss investigation   After becoming meat flosses, the samples were tested with the e-nose. The micropump was used to flow the aroma molecules from the sampling container to the sensing chamber as well as to purge the aroma out from the sensing chamber in the cleaning process. The aroma of the sample passing through the sensor array changed the electrical properties of the sensor materials. Then, the electrical signal changes were processed with a data acquisition system (DAQ) that comprises 16 bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and microcontroller. Each sensor has different responses displayed on a personal computer. In addition, a temperature and humidity sensor was added inside the sensing chamber to monitor the condition that could affect the sensor array responses 16 , 51 , 80 . Machine learning models   The measured data were processed with various machine learning methods (i.e., unsupervised and supervised learning models) to classify beef, chicken, and pork meat floss samples with the highest possible validation accuracy. Before they could be processed, the data features had to be first extracted. The technique used in the extraction process was time window slicing or so-called windowing, which was created for the detection line in the sensing signals 81 .   The response sensors were multiplied by the used windows (e.g., five windows as shown in Fig.  1e ). Then, the resulting time traces were integrated with respect to time referring to 63 . The number of features in each window can be obtained from the following equations:     A = [ W 1 , W 2 , .. . , W i ]   4       W i = ∑ k = 1 N R ( t k ) K i ( t k ) Δ t   5       K i ( t k ) = 1 1 + ( t k − c i a i ) 2 b i   6     where  A  is the feature vector extracted from one sensor comprising four elements,  W i  is the area surrounded by the response sensor and the windowing function curves,  R ( t k )  is the response value at the time  t k ,  K i ( t k )  is the value of the  i -th windowing function at the time  t k ,  k = 1 , 2 , 3 , .. . , N  denoting the sampling points of each curve, Δ t  is the sampling interval between two sampling points, and the parameters ( a i , b i , c i ) define the width, shape, and center, respectively, of the different windowing functions  K i ( t k ) 63 .   The data were cleaned by windowing phase with five windows, and various feature extraction methods (i.e., the maximum 63 , minimum 60 , mean 82 , and median values 60 ) were performed in each window. All those four statistical parameters are the basic feature extraction methods obtained from sensor signals that have been extracted in the time domain 60 . The maximum value indicates a change in the sensor maximum reaction rate in response to the scent of the sample. The minimum value is the lowest sensor response value of the entire data. The mean value is a comparison between the total number of sensor responses to the amount of data. The median value is the middle value of the overall sensor response. Maximum, minimum, mean, and median value equations are shown in Table  5 60 .   Time window slicing was implemented to create different window numbers (W0–W10) in the obtained signals. In case of no window (W0), the overall data were retrieved from 0 to 260 s. Meanwhile, for case of window number other than 0 (W1–W10), the data were retrieved from 20–200 s and subsequently divided into different parts with equal time span for each window.   Feature extraction provides important information from a multidimensional sensor signal collection to obtain optimum results 83 . Basically, the purpose of feature extraction is to take the characteristics of the sample, so that the pattern recognition algorithm can easily recognize one sample from the others. After the features have been extracted from the sensor signals, chemometrics analysis was performed to classify the meat floss samples. Here, the learning investigation started with principal component analysis (PCA), which is an unsupervised pattern recognition method being able to reduce the dimensionality of the data by an orthogonal transformation into principal components (PCs), new variable sets (uncorrelated) that are linear with the original variable sets (possibly correlated variables) 84 – 86 . Also, PCA is useful for observing the differences and similarities between various samples. In our case, only a few significant components are produced (e.g., PC1 and PC2) and subsequently plotted as a graph 87 .   After performing unsupervised learning model of PCA, the analysis was continued with four supervised learning algorithms (i.e., linear discriminant analysis (LDA), quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA), k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), and random forest (RF)). LDA and QDA, which are boundary detection statistical methods, were used to verify the capability of the e-nose to correctly classify meat floss samples according to their types or origins (beef, chicken, and pork). LDA tries to find a linear combination of features and the best linear fit that can separate two or more sample groups 84 . The LDA maximizes the distance of data between each group and minimize the distance of data in each group. LDA helps locate projection to maximize the separation between samples for class separation 88 . The projection is done by linearly transforming data from a high dimensional space to a low dimensional space, in which finally the decision is made in the low dimensional space 89 . The purpose of the LDA is to change the original dataset to a lower-dimensional space with good sample discrimination. Moreover, the possibility of overfitting is reduced 87 .   The QDA is a simple algorithm and is different from LDA. QDA is used to find quadratic boundaries where a quadratic curve divides the variable space in regions. It computes the variance structures for each class separately, creating a more powerful discrimination rule for classes with different covariance matrices 43 . QDA employs different variance-covariance matrices for each class, which differs it from LDA that only considers a single variance-covariance matrix for all classes 90 .   The k-NN as a non-parametric method is used for classification, regression, and establishment of the classification model classes with different degrees of corruption 73 , 91 . The main concept of k-NN is to provide a prediction target, calculate the distance or similarity between the predicted target and all samples, select the first  k  sample that is closest to each other, and finally use that sample to choose a decision according to the most votes of  k 92 . Here,  k  is a positive integer number of neighbors. To calculate the distance between the predicted targets, this model uses the Euclidean distance and selects the dominant class for it 84 , 93 . Euclidean distance is one of the statistical methods that can be used to calculate the interpoint distances between samples. The usage of the Euclidean distance is shown to be efficient for clustering data 69 , 70 . Using the closest suitable neighbor search algorithm, k-NN can become computationally traceable even for large datasets 94 .   The RF model is a non-linear statistical ensemble method that constructs and subsequently averages many randomized, decorrelated decisions. RF utilizes the constructed model to estimate the content of samples by exploiting historical data 64 . The method can be used not only for selecting variables (i.e., for understanding the important variables that are used for prediction), but also for solving classification and regression problems with strong abilities to eliminate the noise and to avoid overfitting 64 , 73 . In RF model, hyperparameter tuning is one of the methods utilized to configure the model parameters and increase the model performance. Nonetheless, a careful attention has to be given when applying this approach because hyperparameter tuning may lead to over-optimistic performance estimation if the used step-by-step methods are not precisely suitable for the model and data condition 95 . RF has several advantages in classification (i.e., the ability to be run on large and high dimensional datasets, good accuracy, stable prediction, and feature selection improvement) 96 . For regression tasks, the RF model has several advantages 97 . First, it offers an uncomplicated inclusion or exclusion of predictors based on data availability and user demands. Second, an inclusion of continuous and categorical predictors is possible. Third, it has a comparatively small number of model parameters that must be specified by the user. Fourth, the risk of overfitting can be minimized. Fifth, the automatic computation of a variable importance score is feasible to assess the contribution of individual predictors to the final model.   For statistical analysis, the data matrix was normalized using scaling and centering techniques. After the normalization step, the initial database was divided into two groups (i.e., training and testing data). Training data were used to develop and create a classification model that allowed the best classification performance for the repeated k-fold cross validation (CV) procedure (10 folds x 10 repetitions, which ensured that at each validation run, 25% of the training data were used for validation accuracy). Meanwhile, the testing data were used for testing accuracy (full prediction) of the classification model that was previously created. The overall modeling development and analysis were carried out using open source R statistical software (version 3.5.1) and utilizing CARET, MASS, and the Kernlab library 50 . Chemical compound characterization   FTIR spectroscopy can be used to qualitatively analyze the sample based on its functional groups 98 . In this work, it was used to rationalize the results of the e-nose analysis for distinguishing meat flosses based on their origins that are beef, chicken, and pork 99 . For FTIR analysis, the meat floss was dried separately in the oven for 7 min. The sample was ground into the powder and pelleted with KBr. The FTIR spectra were recorded on Shimadzu 21 Prestige FTIR spectrophotometer in the wavenumber range of 400–4000 cm −1 .   GC-MS analysis was performed to identify volatile compounds released by the samples 100 . It used a Chromeleon software, a carrier gas of ultra-high pure (UHP) helium, an injector temperature of 260 °C, a mobile phase flow rate of 50 mL/min, a split ratio of 50, a front inlet flow of 1 mL/min, a MS transfer line temperature of 250 °C, an ion source temperature of 200 °C, a purge flow of 3 mL/min, a gas saver flow of 5 mL/min, and a gas saver time of 5 min. For the GC-MS analysis, the meat floss had to be preprocessed first during sample preparation. The meat floss was dried in an oven and then ground into the powder. The sample was extracted using pure methanol (>99%). The analysis was done at room temperature of 23 °C and relative humidity of 55%. The GC-MS data were recorded in an HP-5MS UI column with a length of 30 m and an inner diameter of 0.25 mm. Based on their ion molecular mass (M + ) and fragmentation pattern, the molar mass of the compound was confirmed with the NIST 14 standard library. Reporting summary   Further information on research design is available in the  Nature Research Reporting Summary  linked to this article. Supplementary information     Supplemental Material  (2.4MB, pdf)      Reporting Summary  (1.3MB, pdf)    Acknowledgements   This work was partially funded by Hibah Penelitian Dosen Damas Alokasi Departemen Fisika FMIPA, Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM) under grant agreement number of 133/J01.1.28/PL.06.02/2020. The authors thank all employees at PT Nanosense Instrument Indonesia for their administrative and technical support during the development and assessment of electronic nose. Author contributions   H.S.W., K.T., and L.A.P. conceived the idea and concept, designed the study, formulated the materials, validated the methods, and interpreted the experimental results. H.S.W. and L.A.P. wrote the initial manuscript and revised the paper. L.A.P. performed the experiments and data collection using e-nose, implemented the machine learning models, and created the figures. I.R. and S.N.H. conducted learning computation and provided input for the data analysis. M.P. carried out the characterization and analysis of gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS). A.R. analyzed the FTIR results and revised the paper. A.B.D. and S.W. validated the learning models and revised the paper. R.R. provided input on the chemical compounds of meat flosses. H.S.W. supervised the work, led the project, and acquired the funding at PT Nanosense Instrument Indonesia. K.T. supervised the work, led the project at Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM), and acquired the funding. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. Data availability   The authors declare that all data supporting the findings of this study are available in the paper and supplementary information. Competing interests   The authors declare no competing interests. Footnotes   Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary information   The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41538-023-00205-2. References       1. Gomez M, Dominguez R, Fonseca S, Lorenzo JM. Effect of finishing diet on physico-chemical and lipolytic parameters and volatile compounds throughout the manufacture of dry-cured foal Cecina. Austin J. Nutr. Food Sci. 2015;3:1–9.  [ Google Scholar ]     2. Kaluza J, Harris H, Linden A, Wolk A. Long-term unprocessed and processed red meat consumption and risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective cohort study of women. Eur. J. Nutr. 2019;58:665–672. doi: 10.1007/s00394-018-1658-5.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3. Deneke TT, et al.  Milk and meat consumption patterns and the potential risk of zoonotic disease transmission among urban and peri-urban dairy farmers in Ethiopia. BMC Public Health. 2022;22:1–17. doi: 10.1186/s12889-022-12665-4.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     4. Nurani LH, et al.  Use of chromatographic-based techniques and chemometrics for halal authentication of food products: A review. Int. J. Food Prop. 2022;25:1399–1416. doi: 10.1080/10942912.2022.2082468.  [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ]     5. Domínguez R, et al.  Characterization of volatile compounds of dry-cured meat products using HS-SPME-GC/MS technique. Food Anal. Methods. 2019;12:1263–1284. doi: 10.1007/s12161-019-01491-x.  [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ]     6. Lubis HN, Naim NFM, Alixul NN, Ahmed MU. From market to food plate: current trusted technology and innovations in halal food analysis. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2016;58:55–68. doi: 10.1016/j.tifs.2016.10.024.  [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ]     7. Mortas M, Awad