>Materials and methods   Study cohort, metabolomics and genotype measurements   Data from 1768 fasting serum samples of the German Cooperative Health Research in the Region of Augsburg (KORA F4) population cohort (Holle et al.  2005 ) was used, comprising 910 females and 858 males. Age distribution was 60.53 ± 8.79 years for females and 61.20 ± 8.78 years for males. Body mass index (BMI) distribution was 27.88 ± 5.24 kg/m 2  for females and 28.46 ± 4.29 kg/m 2  for males.   Serum metabolomics measurements were performed on three platforms, LC/MS− (negative mode), LC/MS+ (positive mode), and GC/MS by Metabolon, Inc. (Durham, NC, USA). The 1768 serum samples were measured on 53 different run days, with 34 samples on average per run day. A total of 516 metabolites were quantified, of which 303 had an identified chemical structure. A more detailed description of sample acquisition, experimental procedures, and metabolite identification can be found in File S10.   Each known metabolite was annotated with one of 68 pathways by Metabolon, Inc. A full list of all measured metabolites, including pathway annotations, can be found in Table S9. For correlation analysis, data were normalized for run day-effects by dividing each metabolite by run day median. Since metabolite measurements were assumed to follow a log-normal distribution, the data were log-transformed for all statistical analyses. The run day-corrected and log-transformed data were used to determine outlier samples. Eleven individuals with a Mahalanobis distance (calculated across the complete dataset) greater than four SD from the mean were considered outliers and excluded from the dataset. For the biological evaluation schemes, age, sex, and BMI were used as standard covariates. Seven samples were excluded due to incomplete information in these phenotypes, resulting in 1750 individuals in total.   The KORA F4 cohort was genotyped using the Affymetrix Axiom platform. After quality control, genotype data (measured or imputed according to data from the 1000 genomes project, phase 1 version 3) were available for 1685 of the 1750 individuals. Missing data in KORA F4   To explore the mechanism for the missing data of a given metabolite  m , a second (auxiliary) metabolite  m a u x  was used.  m a u x  was defined as the metabolite with the strongest Pearson correlation to  m  (at least 0.3). An LOD-tendency was assumed if the average value of  m a u x  in samples with missing values in  m  was significantly lower than the average of  m a u x  in samples with measured values in  m . Significance was assessed using Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney tests with  α = 0.05  after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.   For all correlation analyses, only metabolites with more than 10% and less than 70% overall missing values were considered.   In order to explore whether missing values varied among run days, the normalized proportions of missing values among the 53 run days were compared within each platform. For a metabolite  m  and a run day  d , the normalized amount of run day-specific missing values was calculated as the number of missing values for  m  in  d  divided by the total number of samples measured in  d , divided by the median value of missing data of  m  over all run days. Simulation study   Insights gained from the analyses of missing values in real MS-based metabolomics data were used to create artificial data that best mirror reflected patterns of missing data. A brief overview of the simulation framework is provided below, and a detailed description can be found in File S3. For each set of parameters corresponding to a certain data situation, 250 random datasets were generated. For each dataset, two variables were simulated by drawing from a multivariate normal distribution, with sample sizes ranging from 100 to 1000, and with means equal to zero and covariance chosen such that variances were equal to one (representing scaled variables). The Pearson correlation between the two variables was ranged from 0 to 0.4. In addition, for the multivariate analyses and to evaluate imputation methods that apply to a multivariate strategy, auxiliary variables correlated with the two main variables were introduced. Their number and correlation strength were chosen to match the real data (for details, see File S3).   Simulated observations were randomly assigned to “run days” with the number of run days chosen such that each run day comprised 34 observations, according to the average number found for the real KORA F4 measurements.   A proportion of missing values (10%, 30%, 50%, and 70%) was introduced into the main variable pair according to different mechanisms derived from our observations in the KORA F4 Metabolon data (Fig.  5 , File S3).   We used the following parameter settings for the results in the main manuscript: moderate variability of missing data across run days (see File S3), uncorrelated run day-specific missing patterns of the metabolite pair, and varying association of the inverse relation between metabolite concentration and missing values, at  n = 250  and in the presence of informative auxiliary metabolites. For Pearson and partial correlation analysis, both main variables had the same degree of missing data. For logistic regression analysis, the predictor variable had a mixture of 50% run day-dependent probabilistic LOD-based missing data and 50% non-systematic missing data. Results for more parameter settings can be found in File S5. Imputation approaches   A variety of imputation methods (Fig.  5 ) were selected because they were reported in the context of metabolomics data or were developed and adopted to address characteristics in the current dataset.     Mean imputation  ( mean ) All missing values of each incomplete variable are replaced by the average of the observed values of that metabolite.  Minimum imputation  ( min ) All missing values of each incomplete variable are replaced by the smallest observed value of that metabolite (Chen et al.  2011 ; Xia et al.  2009 ; Do et al.  2015 ).  Richardson  &  Ciampi  ( RC ) Assuming that missing values occur due to LOD and the observed metabolite values follow a left-truncated normal distribution, maximum likelihood is used to estimate this distribution. A missing value  x  is then replaced by the expected value of  x  conditional on  x  being below the LOD,  E x | x ⩽ L O D  (Richardson and Ciampi  2003 ).  Imputation by truncated sampling  ( ITS ) This is an extension of the  RC  method, where the missing values are replaced by randomly drawn values from the censored part of the estimated truncated normal distribution.  Multiple imputation by truncated sampling  ( MITS )  ITS  is applied as described above, but multiple imputation is performed according to Rubin’s rules (Rubin  1987 ) using the  R  package  mice , version 2.25. These rules include: (i) the datasets are imputed  m  times, (ii) each of the  m  completed datasets is analyzed separately, and (iii) the  m  resulting estimates are combined using established procedures (Rubin  1987 ; Marshall et al.  2009 ; D’Angelo et al.  2012 ). The number of imputations was set to  m = 20  for all methods.  Runday-specific LOD-based methods  ( RC-R / ITS-R / MITS-R ) The previously described methods  RC, ITS , and  MITS  are applied within run days where at least 17 observations are available. In  RC-R , the remaining missing values are set to the mean of all available expected values. For  ITS-R  and  MITS-R , the remaining missing values are replaced using  ICE-norm  (see below).  Imputation by chained equations  ( ICE-norm / -pmm / -adjR ) was performed using the  R  package  mice , version 2.25. It uses a repeated chain of equations through the incomplete variables, where in each imputation model, the respective incomplete variable is modeled as a function of the remaining variables (van Buuren et al.  1999 ; Van Hoewyk et al.  2001 ; van Buuren and Groothuis-Oudshoorn  2011 ). In  ICE-norm , a Bayesian linear regression is used as the imputation model, whereas in  ICE-pmm  (predictive mean matching as imputation model), missing values are replaced by a random draw of measured values from other observations with the closest predicted values. In  ICE-adjR , a model is specified with random intercept per run day, which aims to better utilize run day information. This model assumes that variable values (i.e., metabolite concentrations) have a run day-specific component, which varies randomly following a normal distribution. For the high-dimensional KORA F4 data, the function  quickpred  of the  mice  package was used to reduce the number of covariates for each model prior to modeling. For each target variable, only variables with a minimum correlation of 0.1 (default setting) were included as covariates. For the simulated data, we refrained from using  quickpred  due to the low dimensionality of the artificial datasets.  Multiple imputation by chained equations  ( MICE-norm / -pmm / -adjR ) was performed using the  R  package  mice , version 2.25:  MICE-norm, MICE-pmm , and  MICE-adjR  consisted of  m = 20  parallel imputation runs of  ICE-norm, ICE-pmm , and  ICE-adjR , respectively. Subsequently, the estimates are combined using Rubin’s rules as described above for  MITS. MICE average version  ( MICE-avg-norm / -pmm )  ICE-norm  or  ICE-pmm  is applied multiple  ( m = 20 )  times in parallel, followed by combining the  m  imputed datasets to one final dataset as the average of the imputed values.  K-nearest neighbor imputation  [ KNN-var ( K )/ KNN-obs ( K )/ KNN-obs-sel ( K )] In  KNN-var  and  KNN-obs , missing values of each variable are replaced by the weighted average of pre-specified  K  nearest variables and observations, respectively. Distances to neighbors were defined as Euclidean distance and weights were chosen as  e - d , where  d  defines the distances between two variables or observations. In  KNN-obs-sel, KNN-obs  is performed by selecting the strongest correlated variables with  ρ ⩾ 0.2 ,  but it was constrained to a minimum of 5 and a maximum of 10 variables. The number of neighbors for  K  was set to 3, 5, 10, and 20.   More detailed descriptions of  RC, RC-R, ITS, MITS, ICE, MICE, MICE-avg , and  KNN -based methods can be found in File S4.   R scripts and an R markdown file with example calls for the simulation of incomplete data with realistic missingness patterns and imputation methods are available at  https://github.com/krumsieklab/MissingValues . Statistical evaluation of missing data handling strategies in the simulation study   Pearson correlation, partial correlation, linear regression, and logistic regression analysis were performed, and the ability of imputation methods to reconstruct true associations and unbiased hypothesis test results was evaluated. For logistic regression, a dichotomized variable was simulated by discretizing one of the simulated continuous variables: all values above the median were set to 1 and all values below the median were set to 0. This dichotomized variable was used as response and the remaining continuous variable as predictor. For MI strategies, the resulting (correlation or regression coefficient) estimates and their variances were combined using Rubin’s rules. The obtained point estimates were then compared with the true underlying values by assessing the validity of hypothesis tests. To this end, type 1 error was calculated as the proportion of significant estimates (at α = 0.05) after imputation when there was no true effect. Power was calculated as the proportion of significant estimates (at α = 0.05) after imputation in the presence of a true effect. Detailed results can be found in File S5. Evaluation based on pathway modularity   This analysis was based on pathway annotations from Metabolon Inc. (see Supporting Information S9). Each imputation strategy was applied to the KORA F4 metabolomics data, resulting in different imputed datasets. All unknown metabolites were excluded since these compounds were not assigned to a pathway. For each imputed dataset, a Gaussian graphical model (GGM) was estimated to infer a network using the  R  package  GeneNet , version 1.2.12. In previous studies, we have demonstrated that these models correctly reconstruct biochemical pathways from the data (Krumsiek et al.  2011 ; Shin et al.  2014 ; Aichler et al.  2017 ). In the case of MIs, a GGM was estimated for each imputed dataset, followed by combining partial correlations using Rubin’s rules after a Fisher Z-transformation. The network was constructed using partial correlations that are significantly different from zero after Bonferroni correction for  n × ( n - 1 ) / 2 ,  where  n  is the number of metabolites.   The pathway-based network modularity measure  Q  (Newman and Girvan  2004 ; Krumsiek et al.  2011 ) was calculated for each network as   Q = ∑ i = 1 | S | A V i , V i A V , V - A V i , V A V , V 2 ,   where  S  is the total number of pathways,  V  is the set of all metabolites, and  V i  describes the subset of metabolites annotated with pathway  i .   A ( V i , V j )  is the number of edges between any two node sets  V i  and  V j . The variance of  Q  was estimated non-parametrically using bootstrapping of the original dataset (R package  boot , version 1.3-15) with 1000 runs. Evaluation based on metabolite-SNP associations   Linear regression was performed to determine genetic associations with metabolites using KORA F4  CCA  and imputed data and the results were compared with each other. For this analysis, we selected metabolite-SNP pairs for which (i) a genome-wide significant association could be identified in the meta-analysis of KORA F4 and TwinsUK cohorts in a previous GWAS (Shin et al.  2014 ) (summary statistics retrieved from  http://www.gwas.eu ); (ii) the proportion of each metabolite’s missing values in KORA F4 was between 10 and 70%; (iii) the metabolite was measured in the EPIC-Norfolk cohort, which we used to further benchmark the preservation of effect sizes; and (iv) a functional connection between the genetic locus of the SNP and the metabolite (e.g., metabolite is a known substrate of the enzyme/transporter) was evident according to manual curation of the GWAS results (Table S8). For each imputed dataset, 18 metabolite-SNP pairs were tested for genetic association using age- and sex-corrected linear regression models under the assumption of an additive genetic model  (metabolite ∼ β 0 + β 1 × SNP + β 2 × age + β 3 × sex) . To avoid spurious associations, metabolic data points greater than four SDs from the mean were removed prior to computing linear models. For MI approaches, the regression coefficients were pooled using Rubin’s rules as provided by the  R  package  mice , version 2.25. For each metabolite-SNP pair, the variance of the regression coefficients and p-values were estimated using bootstrapping.   To explore which imputation approaches increased statistical power, p-values obtained for the effect sizes based on imputed data were compared with p-values obtained from  CCA  by calculating their ratio as  r p = - log 10 p i m p p C C A - log 10 ( p C C A ) ,  where  p i m p  was the p-value obtained for imputed data and  p C C A  was the p-value derived from  CCA . A ratio less than or equal to zero indicated either no power gain or a power loss, whereas a ratio greater than zero indicated a drop in p-value, which suggested that statistical power increased when imputation was performed.   In addition to statistical power gain, the imputation approaches should be able to preserve effect sizes compared to  CCA . Standardized effect sizes obtained from the imputed data  ( β i m p )  were compared with standardized effect sizes estimated for  CCA   ( β C C A )  based on the KORA F4 data (n = 1750) and the EPIC-Norfolk data (n = 10,634), assuming estimates from the EPIC-Norfolk data to be close to true effects. We calculated the ratio  r β = log 2 | β i m p β C C A | , with a low ratio indicating a similar effect size between the imputed data and  CCA . A highly negative or positive  r β  indicates an underestimation or overestimation of the effect sizes in imputed data, respectively. A well performing imputation method is assumed to obtain high  r p  and low absolute  r β . Electronic supplementary material   Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.     Supplementary material 1 (PDF 24335 KB)  (23.8MB, pdf)