>Materials and Methods   Chemicals   Methanol (chromatography grade), n-Heptane (chromatography grade), methoxyamine, pyridine, and N-methyl-N-trimethylsilyl-trifluoroacetamide+1% trimethylchlorosilane (MSTFA+1%TMCS) were purchased from Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany). Stable-isotope-labeled [ 13 C 2 ]-myristic acid was purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA, United States). Animal Studies   Thirty male C57BL/6J mice (5 weeks old, purchased from Changzhou Cavens Laboratory Animal Co., Changzhou, China) were housed under a 12 h light/12 h dark condition (lights on at 6:00 and lights off at 18:00). All animal care and experimental procedures protocols were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of China Pharmaceutical University (2018-DMPK-12-06). All mice were fed with a standard chow diet (AIN-93M, Trophic Animal Feed High-Tech Co., Ltd, Nantong, China) and tap water  ad libitum  for 1 week to acclimate the environment. The mice were divided into five groups (n = 6), Sham group (Sham), 6 h after PHx group (6 h), 36 h after PHx group (36 h), 72 h after PHx group (72 h), and 168 h after PHx group (168 h). The mice were anesthetized with isofluorane when doing the PHx surgery. For the Sham group, the abdominal cavity was opened without cutting the liver and then sewed; for PHx groups, the left lateral and median liver lobes, including gall bladder, were resected according to the procedure in literature. The mice were sacrificed 0 h (Sham group), 6, 36, 72 and 168 h after PHx. At the time of sacrifice, mice were weighed and anesthetized by avertin; the whole blood was centrifuged at 8,000 rpm for 5 min to get the serum and was stored at −80°C for further analysis. Livers were harvested and weighed, and the liver index was calculated (liver weight/body weight). The proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) expression was measured, and images were collected using an inverted microscope (Leica DMI 3000B, Germany). A flowchart of the animal experiment is shown in  Figure 1A .   FIGURE 1.     Open in a new tab     (A) , Flowchart of the animal experiment. Liver weight  (B) , Body weight  (C) , and liver index  (D)  change at different stages after 2/3 PHx. Liver function index, alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  (E) , aspartate aminotransferase (AST)  (F) , and alkaline phosphatase (AKP)  (G)  were measured for the Sham group and 6, 36, 72, and 168 h after PHx, serum glucose  (H) , triglyceride  (I) , total cholesterol  (J) , and total bile acids (TBA)  (K)  were measured.  (L) , PCNA expression in the livers of mice before and after PHx. Measurement of Serum Biochemical Index   Levels of serum glucose, triglyceride, cholesterol, total bile acids (TBA), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase (AKP) were measured using kits purchased from Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute (Nanjing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sample Preparation for GC/MS and Compound Identification   The metabolites in serum were profiled by a GC/MS-based metabolomics method as previously reported ( A et al., 2005 ). Briefly, 50 μL of serum was extracted with 200 μL of methanol containing 5 μg/ml [ 13 C 2 ]-myristic acid; after oximation and derivatization, 0.5 μL of the sample were injected into a SHIMADZU QP2010Ultra/SE GC/MS system (Kyoto, Japan) with an RTx-5MS fused silica capillary column (30 m × 0.25 mm ID, J&W Scientific, United States). The raw data acquired were processed by GCMSSolution (version 4.11). The metabolites were identified using NIST 14 (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, United States), Wiley 9 (Wiley–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co KGaA, Weinheim, Germany), and an in-house mass spectra library database ( A et al., 2005 ;  Sun et al., 2019 ). The Regression of Liver Index and Metabolites by Nine Machine Learning Methods   PCA was performed for dimension reduction using SIMCA-P 13.0 software (Umetrices, Umeå, Sweden). Nine machine learning methods including LASSO, PLS, PCR, KNN, SVM, RF, xgbDART, NNET, and BRNN were used for regression between the liver index and metabolites. The code used was shown in  Supplementary Data Sheet S2 . Models were evaluated by the parameters, including the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and R square (R 2 ). All of the machine learning methods were performed and tuned using the “caret” package in the R project (version 3.6.3). Variable importance in the projection (VIP) analysis was used to evaluate metabolites’ contribution to the model. Pathway Analysis   Metabolomics pathway analysis of the metabolites with VIP >1 was carried out using MetaboAnalyst ( www.metaboanalyst.ca ). Hypergeometric test for over-representation analysis and relative-betweenness centrality for pathway topology analysis was selected, and Mus musculus (KEGG) library was chosen. Selection of Metabolite Set for the Prediction of the Liver Index   Correlation coefficients between liver index, ALT, and metabolites at different time points were calculated. To further evaluate the RF method’s ability to predict the liver index after 2/3 PHx, the dataset was split into the training set and testing set (5:1). The metabolite with the most significant VIP value, the metabolites ranked top 4, 8, 12, 20, 40, 59 and the whole dataset without one metabolite whose VIP is 0 ( Supplementary Data Sheet S1 ) was further used to train the RF model and predict the liver index in the testing set, and their performance was also compared. Models were evaluated by the parameters including MAE, RMSE, and R 2 . Statistical Analysis   For statistical analysis of MAE, RMSE, and R 2  in each model, Kruskal–Wallis Test followed by Wilcox test was used; for statistical analysis of metabolites among groups, One-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD multiple comparison test and corrected by the Benjamini-Hochberg method to control the False Discovery Rate (FDR) was conducted by R project (version 3.6.3). The correlation coefficients were calculated by the “corrplot” package in the R project.  p  < 0.05 was considered statistically different. Results   Regeneration of Liver After 2/3 Partial Hepatectomy   To investigate liver regeneration progress and the associated metabolic change after partial hepatectomy, 2/3 PHx in C57BL/6J mice was performed and samples were collected at five time points (Sham group, 6, 36, 72, and 168 h after PHx, the total sample size is 30). The liver index was calculated using liver weight and body weight. The remaining liver exhibited an elevated growth rate in the first 3 days and returned to nearly 90% of the original weight after 7 days ( Figures 1B–D ). During liver regeneration, ALT ( Figure 1E ), AST ( Figure 1F ), and AKP ( Figure 1G ) all showed a significant increase at the early stage and returned to normal after 72 h. Serum glucose ( Figure 1H ) was reduced after PHx. Serum triglyceride ( Figure 1I ) and total cholesterol ( Figure 1J ) showed a slight decrease at 6 h after 2/3 PHx, increased at 36 and 72 h after 2/3 PHx, and fell at the late phase of liver regeneration. Total bile acids (TBA) ( Figure 1K ) in the serum significantly increased after 2/3 PHx. PCNA staining on the livers of sham-operated mice and the livers of mice following operation revealed apparent DNA replication, and there were most positive cells at 36 h after 2/3 PHx ( Figure 1L ). GC/MS Chromatograms and Overview of the Metabolomics Data   Typical serum GC/MS chromatograms from each time point after PHx are shown in  Figure 2A . One hundred eighteen compounds were identified, including organic acids, amino acids, carbohydrates, purines and fatty acids, the representative mass spectrum, and the comparison with mass spectrum in the library were shown in  Supplementary Data Sheet S1 . Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to gain an overview of the metabolomics data. From the scatter plot ( Figure 2B ), no outlier was found in the PCA analysis. A clear separation between the 6 h group, 36 h group, and sham group was observed, whereas the 72 h group and 168 h group were closer to the Sham group; this suggested that PHx induced significant metabolic change at the early stage and returned to normal during the liver regeneration process.   FIGURE 2.     Open in a new tab     (A)  Typical GC/MS chromatograms of serum from Sham group and 6, 36, 72, and 168 h after PHx.  (B)  3D scoress plot of principal components analysis of mouse serum from Sham group, 6 h group, 36 h group, 72 h group, and 168 h group, respectively. Each point represents a metabolite profile of a biological replicate. Comparison of Machine Learning Methods and Selection of Important Features   To select the most suitable machine learning model of the regression between the liver index and metabolites, we performed and compared nine machine learning methods: LASSO, PLS, PCR, KNN, SVM, RF, xgbDART, NNET, and BRNN. We performed 10-fold cross-validation 10 times on the dataset, and MAE, RMSE, and R 2  were calculated to evaluate the model performance. As shown in  Figures 3A–C , the tree-based methods RF method and xgbDART method had the minimum average MAE, RMSE, and the maximum average R 2 . xgbDART method is rather time-consuming and showed no obvious superiority over the RF method; thus, we selected the RF method for further analysis. To choose the most important metabolites contributing to the RF model, we performed VIP analysis and the metabolites which ranked top 20 were selected. Ornithine, phenylalanine, 2-aminobutanoic acid, 2-hydroxybutyric acid, and lysine had the highest VIP values ( Figure 3D ). The relative amounts of these metabolites were shown in  Figure 4A–L .   FIGURE 3.     Open in a new tab   Average MAE  (A) , RMSE  (B)  and R 2   (C)  on 10 repeated 10-fold cross-validation of nine machine learning algorithms for prediction of the liver index from metabolomics data.  (D)  Variable importance revealed by random forest (RF) method. FIGURE 4.     Open in a new tab   The relative abundance of metabolites with the highest VIP values in the serum of mice from the Sham group and 6, 36, 72, and 168 h after PHx. The box plot shows the relative abundance of metabolites, including ornithine  (A) , phenylalanine  (B) , 2-aminobutanoic acid  (C) , 2-hydroxybutyric acid  (D) , lysine  (E) , glutamic acid  (F) , ethanolamine  (G) , threonine  (H) , phosphoric acid  (I) , glucitol  (J) , myo-inositol  (K)  and alpha-hydroxyisobutyric acid  (L) . Data were represented as mean ± S.D. Pathway Analysis   To reveal the key pathways changed during liver regeneration, the selected most important metabolites in serum were further analyzed by the online tool MetaboAnalyst ( http://www.metaboanalyst.ca ). The chosen metabolites were mapped to KEGG metabolic pathways for over-representation and pathway analyses. The pathway was considered to be significantly related which had a  p  value of less than 0.05. Arginine biosynthesis, Pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis, Galactose metabolism, Valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation, and beta-Alanine metabolism, etc. were the most influenced pathways,  Figure 5 .   FIGURE 5.     Open in a new tab   Metabolite pathway analysis based on metabolites displayed significant variation in the serum revealed that a. Arginine biosynthesis, b. Pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis, c. Galactose metabolism, d. Valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation, e. beta-Alanine metabolism, f. Alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism, g. Glutathione metabolism, h. Phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis, i. Glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, j. Cysteine and methionine metabolism, k. Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism, l. D-Glutamine and D-glutamate metabolism, m. Arginine and proline metabolism were the most affected pathways after 2/3 PHx. Random Forest Model With a Set of Four Metabolites Were Selected for the Prediction of the Liver Index After 2/3 PHx   To further validate the most important metabolites, correlation analysis was performed and shown by heatmap in  Figure 6 . Metabolites including ornithine ( Figure 7A ), phenylalanine ( Figure 7B ), 2-aminobutanoic acid ( Figure 7C ), 2-hydroxybutyric acid ( Figure 7D ), lysine ( Figure 7E ), glutamic acid ( Figure 7F ), ethanolamine ( Figure 7G ), and threonine ( Figure 7H ) all showed an apparent positive correlation with the liver index. They showed obvious negative correlations with ALT,  Figures 7I–P . The metabolomics data were partitioned into the training set and testing set, containing 25 samples and five samples, respectively. The comparison of RF methods using a different number of metabolites showed a significant difference in RAE, RMSE, and R 2  among other models ( Figures 8A–C ). Then the models were tested on the testing set, and the regression of actual liver index and predicted liver index were performed. The model RF05 containing metabolites ranked top 20 had the minimum MAE and RMSE. Considering the accuracy of prediction with as few metabolites as possible, we selected model RF02 with a set of 4 metabolites including ornithine, phenylalanine, lysine, and 2-hydroxybutyric acid as the final prediction model, and the MAE, RMSE, and R 2  of the testing set were 0.002, 0.003, and 0.948, respectively ( Figure 8D ). The metabolic map of these metabolites was shown in  Supplementary Figures S1–S4 .   FIGURE 6.     Open in a new tab   The heatmap shows the correlation coefficients between the liver index and individual metabolites. Each square represents the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the metabolite of the row and the column. Magenta color represents a positive correlation and blue color represents a negative correlation. FIGURE 7.     Open in a new tab   The correlation coefficients between the liver index and metabolites including ornithine  (A) , phenylalanine  (B) , 2-aminobutanoic acid  (C) , 2-hydroxybutyric acid  (D) , lysine  (E) , glutamic acid  (F) , ethanolamine  (G)  and threonine  (H) , and the correlations between ALT and metabolites including ornithine  (I) , phenylalanine  (J) , 2-aminobutanoic acid  (K) , 2-hydroxybutyric acid  (L) , lysine  (M) , glutamic acid  (N) , ethanolamine  (O) , and threonine  (P) . FIGURE 8.     Open in a new tab   Average MAE  (A) , RMSE  (B) , and R 2   (C)  on 10 repeated 10-fold cross-validation of random forest method with a different subset of the metabolomics data for prediction of the liverindex from the train data set.  (D) , the linear regression between the original liver index with the predicted liver index by the RF method in the testing data set. Discussion   After 2/3 PHx, the remnant liver initiates the progress of regeneration and the liver cells would undergo the resting state of the cell cycle (G0) to G1 transition, then S phase, and ultimately mitosis. The progress of liver regeneration includes initiation, progression, and termination, and each of these phases was tightly regulated by numerous signaling pathways ( Caldez et al., 2018 ). To explore the metabolic change and then establish a regression method to predict the liver index at each phase by metabolites in the serum during liver regeneration, we select four time points after 2/3 PHx representing different stages. The liver index at different time points showed a typical growth curve and indicated that these time points could represent the growth of the remaining liver. The serum biochemical indexes representing the liver function and staining results representing the growth of liver cells also indicated the different phases during liver regeneration.   Machine learning has variable applications in healthcare. The main functions of machine learning algorithms include classification, regression, and dimensional reduction. Here we aimed to establish a relationship between metabolites in the serum and liver index at a different time of liver regeneration by regression and select the potential biomarkers of liver regeneration. We compared nine machine learning algorithms for regression, LASSO, PLS, PCR, KNN, SVM, RF, xgbDART, NNET, and BRNN. LASSO is a regression model originally formulated from the linear regression model and performed both for variable selection and regression. PLS and PCR are methods where multivariate data is projected into a smaller coordinate space (dimensional reduction) before regression. SVM method constructs hyperplanes that can be used for classification and regression. RF and xgbDART are both tree-based models which construct a multitude of decision trees. NNET and BRNN are considered deep learning methods and they simulate biological neural networks that constitute animal brains. These methods are more complex non-linear machine learning methods applicable for analyzing high-dimensional metabolomics data. The comparison of MAE, RMSE, and R 2  of the methods used showed RF and xgbDART are the most accurate methods. xgbDART is much more time-consuming than RF, whereas it offers no significant advantage. Thus we select RF as the method used for further optimization and analysis. From the VIP analysis of RF, we choose different amounts of metabolites to validate the model performance further and evaluate its prediction ability. A metabolite set containing ornithine, phenylalanine, lysine, and 2-hydroxybutyric acid was selected as the potential metabolite set for predicting the liver index after 2/3 PHx.   Networks, including cytokine, growth factor, and metabolic, are the essential circuitry required for liver regeneration ( Fausto et al., 2006 ). Metabolic alteration is proposed to occur immediately after PHx. The previous gene expression data implied that metabolic genes are suppressed during liver regeneration, which is considered paradoxical because it maintains metabolic homeostasis and supports regeneration ( Fausto et al., 2006 ). Currently, there is more understanding of metabolic changes during liver regeneration. Glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, bile acid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and one-carbon metabolism are essential for liver regeneration ( Huang and Rudnick, 2014 ;  Preziosi and Monga, 2017 ). We also observed a significant elevation of triglycerides and bile acids and the reduction of glucose in the serum during liver regeneration. It has been reported that glucose supplementation impairs liver regeneration, and preventing the accumulation of hepatic fat also suppresses liver regeneration ( Huang and Rudnick, 2014 ). Dietary caloric restriction accelerates the initiation of regenerative hepatocellular proliferation ( Cuenca et al., 2001 ). These studies revealed the importance of nutrient metabolism in liver regeneration. Bile acids are important for liver regeneration following partial hepatectomy, the extra bile acids cause activation of bile acid receptors including TGR5 and FXR thus preventing hepatotoxicity and providing signals to the regenerative process ( Fan et al., 2015 ;  van de Laarschot et al., 2016 ;  Kong et al., 2018 ). Protein synthesis and amino acid metabolism are essential functions of the liver, and altered amino acid metabolism is observed during liver regeneration. Amino acids are not only components of protein but also work as endogenous signaling molecules. Ornithine is an amino acid that plays a vital role in the urea cycle. A previous study found that urea cycle enzymes were significantly perturbated during liver regeneration, which enhanced urea cycle capacity and increased ammonia elimination ( Meier et al., 2019 ). 2-hydroxybutyric acid is an organic acid derived from alpha-ketobutyrate, and alpha-ketobutyrate is produced by threonine and methionine catabolism and glutathione anabolism. 2-aminobutyric acid is a byproduct of cysteine biosynthesis from cystathionine and it can modulate glutathione homeostasis ( Irino et al., 2016 ). Glutathione is a critical intracellular antioxidant and participates in many critical cellular functions including defense against toxins and free radicals, modulation of cell cycle, and maintenance of immune system homeostasis. Previous literature reported that