>MATERIALS AND METHODS   Ethics statement   The experimental collection procedures and protocols were conducted on post-euthanasia sheep provided by the Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine. Sheep were not euthanized for the purpose of this study, but access was granted to allow collection of all samples post-mortem. Animals, diets, and experimental design   Sixteen sheep were analyzed in the rumenomics analysis: 10 crossbreeds, 3 Dorset, 2 Hampshire, and 1 Ramboilette. Of these, 9 were male and 7 were female. The Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine maintained the sheep for 2-4 weeks prior to euthanasia and sample collection in controlled indoor housing conditions as part of a veterinary educational program. Sheep were fed ad libitum hay (75% grass, 25% alfalfa) and had free access to water. The sixteen sheep were healthy, and their age and weight were recorded ( Supplementary Table S1 ). On the day of rumen sample collection, sheep were fasted for 24 hours prior to general anesthesia and euthanasia. The sheep were euthanized by intravenous injection of overdose barbiturate (Euthasol, Virbac) while the sheep were under general anesthesia. All pre-euthanasia procedures were performed by the Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine on an approved, unrelated Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocol. Rumen fluid sampling and processing   Rumen fluid collection and processing included the use of a portable cooler box, a knife, cheesecloth, 10 L plastic containers, a thermometer, falcon tubes (ranging from 50 to 500 mL), a centrifuge (Eppendorf 5804R), and 1000 mL Kimax media storage glass bottles. Samples of rumen fluid were collected immediately after euthanasia in a necropsy lab to minimize excessive contact between the rumen and air. We filtered the rumen fluid through four consecutive layers of cheesecloth squeezed by hand and transferred into a 10 L plastic container using a funnel. After filtration, 500 mL of rumen fluid was centrifuged in falcon tubes at maximum speed for 10 minutes. After centrifugation, the supernatant was carefully transferred into five 1000 mL Kimax media storage bottles. Rumen fluid samples were divided into two groups: one was stored at − 20 °C for future use. At the same time, the other was prepared for submission to Metabolon (MA, USA) for metabolomics analysis and annotation. Sample preparation and metabolomics analysis   Pre-processed rumen fluid samples were centrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 15 minutes, and the supernatant was filtered (0.45 μm filter, Millipore) before being transferred into 2 mL tubes. A total of 48 frozen samples were shipped to Metabolon (MA, USA) for extraction and preparation using their standard solvent extraction methods. The samples were analyzed using Ultrahigh Performance Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS).   Metabolon’s protocol indicated sample preparation involved the automated MicroLab STAR ®  system (Hamilton Company). Recovery standards were added to ensure quality control, and proteins were precipitated with methanol under vigorous shaking, followed by centrifugation. The resulting extract was divided into fractions for analysis using different UPLC-MS/MS methods, ensuring coverage of chemically diverse metabolites. These fractions are two for analysis by separate reverse-phase UPLC-MS/MS methods using positive ion mode electrospray ionization, one for analysis by reverse-phase UPLC-MS/MS with negative ion mode electrospray ionization, one for analysis by HILIC/UPLC-MS/MS with negative ion mode electrospray ionization, and one reserved as a backup.   Compounds were identified through Metabolon’s proprietary library, which included retention time/index, the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z), and MS/MS spectral data. Identifications were based on retention index, accurate mass (±10 ppm), and MS/MS scores, allowing precise biochemical differentiation. Statistical analysis   We constructed per-metabolite generalized linear models (GLMs) to predict metabolite concentrations based on the phenotypic characteristics of sex, breed, weight, and age, including interaction terms between these phenotypic variables. Metabolites were considered significant if the model p-value was less than 0.05. The false discovery rate (FDR) for model p-values was also calculated for multiple testing corrections. A Wald's test was applied to assess the relationships between significant metabolites and each phenotypic feature and their interaction terms, with a significance threshold of p-value less than 0.05. Significant metabolites identified by GLMs were further evaluated using the Mann-Whitney test for sex differences and Spearman’s correlation for associations with age, weight, and other significant metabolites. Additionally, linear regression models were constructed to investigate metabolites associated with the interaction between weight and sex in sheep. This multi-faceted approach provided a comprehensive understanding of the metabolite profiles related to the phenotypic traits. Multivariate statistical analysis   We implemented a multivariate statistical analysis to study metabolites in rumen fluid using  mixOmics  (R packages) (version 3.19) [ 18 ]. Sparse Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (sPLS-DA) was used to determine the metabolite associations with sex, and sparse PLS-regression (sPLS-R) models were created to determine the metabolite associations with age and weight. The model R 2  and Q 2 , were used to evaluate the validity of the three models to mitigate over-fitting. For the sPLS-DA model, the area under the curve (AUC) indicated the prediction accuracy; higher AUC values closer to 1 reflect higher predictive performance. In the case of sPLS-R, we used the root mean squared error of prediction (RMSEP) to measure model assessment, providing insight into the model's accuracy in predicting outcomes. In the sPLS models, we calculated variable importance in projection (VIP) to identify important metabolites contributing to the model (VIP > 1). This approach ensured that the pathway enrichment analysis incorporated the most influential metabolites based on their contribution to group separation and variance. Also, we constructed Multiblock PLS models to relate metabolites concentration (X – block) to a three-dimensional Y- block consisting of sheep phenotypic characteristics: sex [female, male], age (months) [mean: 36.81, standard deviation:18.72], and weight [mean: 63.19, standard deviation: 15.19]. Pathway enrichment analysis with MetaboAnalyst   Metabolites identified as significant from generalized linear models, single sparse PLS, and multiblock-Y PLS were subjected to pathway analysis using MetaboAnalyst (version 6.0) [ 19 ]. The pathway analysis module combined results from pathway enrichment analysis with pathway topology analysis. From the 20-pathway library available for mammals, we selected the  Ovis aries  (sheep) for the pathway analysis. Over-representation analysis was performed using a Fisher's exact test. All statistical p-values from enrichment analysis were further adjusted for multiple testing by Holm-Bonferroni (Holm-adjusted p-value < 0.05) and false discovery rate (FDR-adjusted p-value < 0.05) to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. The impact values indicated the pathway impact values obtained from pathway topology analysis. RESULTS   Rumenomics explored functional linkages between metabolites and sheep phenotypic traits   We collected rumen samples from 16 healthy sheep (9 male and 7 female) immediately post-mortem through a veterinary school educational program. We prepared the samples for Metabolon's metabolomics analysis via liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Multivariate statistical analyses, including generalized linear models, partial least squares (PLS), and multiblock-Y PLS, were applied to identify if rumen metabolites are coordinately linked to sheep traits such as age, sex, and weight or if they were distinct ( Fig. 1 ). The description of sheep phenotypical characteristics are listed in ( Supplementary Table S1 ).   Figure 1. Rumenomics: Evaluation of rumen metabolite content on phenotypic sheep features.     Open in a new tab   Rumen metabolites were collected from 16 healthy sheep, of which 9 were male, and 7 were female. Sheep traits, weight, age, and breed were recorded as covariates. Rumen metabolite content was quantified by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy by Metabolon. Systems modeling of metabolite content and sheep covariates were determined by PLS and generalized linear model. Phenylalanine metabolism was an enriched pathway associated with sheep sex, age, and weight.   The main and interaction effect univariate linear models enable the assessment of differentially abundant metabolites by incorporating the effects of sex, breed, weight, and age. These models evaluated individual and combined effects of these phenotypical traits as predictors of metabolite abundance. Based on the p-values from the main effect models, 152 significant metabolites were identified (p-value < 0.05). However, only N-acetylputrescine, gulonate, methionine, and sedoheptulose remained significant after FDR correction for multiple testing ( Fig 2A ). By examining the allocation of these four metabolites within the top 10-ranked significant metabolites (p-value < 0.05) for each phenotypic variable represented in each model coefficient, we identified the following associations: N-acetylputrescine, methionine, and sedoheptulose were significantly associated with sex; N-acetylputrescine and gulonate with weight; and gulonate and sedoheptulose with age ( Supplementary Table S2 ).   Figure 2. Univariate linear modeling identified metabolites associated with sheep sex, weight, and age.     Open in a new tab   (A)  Heatmap of significant metabolites (p<0.05) based on main effects univariate linear model.  (B)  Heatmap of significant metabolites (p<0.05) based on age-corrected interaction effects univariate linear model.  (C)  Pathway enrichment analysis performed by MetaboAnalyst using significant metabolites from the interaction term Sex:Weight (p<0.05). ( D ) Mann-Whitney test for sex and Spearman’s correlations with age of phenylalanine and phenylpyruvate.  (E)  Linear regression of metabolites stratified by sheep sex, prioritized by the interaction term Sex:Weight. Similarly, from the interaction effect models, 90 significant metabolites were identified (p-value < 0.05). After FDR correction, only 17 metabolites remained significant. By examining the allocation of these 17 metabolites across each phenotypic variable represented in each model coefficient, we identified nine significant metabolites associated with sex, weight and age, including: (3'-5')-adenylyluridine, nicotinic acid mononucleotide (NaMN), 3-acetylphenol sulfate, adenosine 3',5'-diphosphate, glycocholate, pentadecanoate (15:0), guanosine 5'-diphosphate (GDP), TMP, butyrylputrescine/isobutyrylputrescine ( Fig. 2B ). Exclusive metabolites associated with sex and weight coefficients included: pipecolate, N6-succinyladenosine, N-acetylglycine, 2,4,6-trihydroxybenzoate. Additionally, (3'-5')-adenylyladenosine and phenethylamine were associated with weight and age, while N-acetylglucosaminylasparagine and sedoheptulose were exclusive with age. The interaction terms Sex:Weight and Sex:Age consistently identified the metabolites that were previously ranked as significant in the interaction effect model ( Supplementary Table S3 ,  Fig. S1 ). Interestingly, the interaction term weight:age ranked only five of the 17 metabolites, including N-acetylglucosaminylasparagine, pentadecanoate (15:0), phenethylamine, sedoheptulose and butyrylputrescine/isobutyrylputrescine.   To further study the impact of sex and weight on sheep metabolite profiles both individually and through their interactions, age-corrected linear models were constructed for each metabolite. This approach facilitated the assessment of metabolites associated with sheep weight and sex while treating age as a categorical variable, enabling the detection of non-linear effects across distinct age groups. Based on the p-values from the age-corrected main effect models, 91 significant metabolites were identified (p-value < 0.05). However, no metabolites remained significant after FDR correction for multiple testing. By considering the top-ranked metabolites based on their FDR-adjusted significance, the following top five metabolites were identified from age-corrected main effect models: 5-oxoproline, N-acetylglycine, histidine betaine (hercynine), serotonin, and glycerophosphoglycerol. Metabolites associated with the sex coefficient included N-formylanthranilic acid, ciliatine (2-aminoethylphosphonate), 3-hydroxy-2-ethylpropionate, N,N-dimethyl-5-aminovalerate and methionine. Metabolites related to weight coefficient included histidine betaine (hercynine), serotonin, glycerophosphoglycerol, norvaline, and alpha-hydroxyisovalerate. The complete list of top-ranked metabolites is listed in  Supplementary Table S4 .   Based on the p-values from the age-corrected interaction effect models, 20 significant metabolites were identified (p-value < 0.05). Still, only 13 metabolites remained significant after FDR correction for multiple testing, including, 3-acetylphenol sulfate, nicotinic acid mononucleotide (NaMN), (3'-5')-uridylyladenosine, (3'-5')-guanylylcytidine, (3'-5')-adenylyluridine, (3'-5')-adenylyladenosine, (3'-5')-adenylylcytidine, (3'-5')-adenylylguanosine, adenosine 3',5'-diphosphate, riboflavin (vitamin B2), glycocholate, 2,3-dimethylsuccinate and phenylalanylglycine. These 13 metabolites were consistently among the top-ranked across the coefficients for sex, weight, and sex:weight interaction. Their relationships with the phenotypic traits of sheep were hierarchically clustered ( Fig. 2B ).   Pathways analysis of metabolites linked to the sex:weight interaction identified 'phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis' and 'phenylalanine metabolism' as significantly enriched pathways (p-value < 0.05) ( Fig. 2C ). These pathways exhibited the highest impact scores of 0.5 and 0.62, respectively, suggesting that the matched metabolites occupied key structural positions within the pathway network, contributing to their functional influence ( Supplementary Table S5 ). On the other hand, significant metabolites associated with the interaction term sex:age from interaction effects univariate linear models identified as significant pathway the 'pyrimidine metabolism.' Nevertheless, the pathway impact score was 0.18.   Next, we evaluated how the sex predictor modulated the effect of the weight predictor. A total of 58 metabolites were associated with the sex:weight interaction (p-value < 0.05) ( Supplementary Table S5 ). Notably, we found substantial sex-based differences in the abundance of suberate (C8-DC), dodecanedioate (C12), 3-sulfo-alanine, (3’-5')-adenylyl uridine, (3’-5')-guanylyl cytidine, 2,3-dimethylsuccinate, anthranilate, 2,4,6-trihydroxybenzoate, riboflavin (vitamin B12), and 4-guanidinobutanoate (p-value < 0.05) ( Fig. S2A ). Also, Spearman's correlation analysis revealed significant positive correlations among dinucleotides, including adenosine 3'5'-diphosphate, (3’-5')-adenylyl guanosine, (3’-5')-adenyl adenosine, (3’-5')-adenylyl cytidine, (3’-5')-adenylyl uridine, (3’-5')-guanylyl cytidine, and (3’-5')-uridylyl adenosine ( Fig. S2B ). This finding likely indicated their shared involvement in a specific metabolic pathway related to energy transfer or nucleotide metabolism in the rumen fluid.   Pathways analysis identified phenylalanine and phenylpyruvate as key metabolites for the prioritized pathways. Mann-Whitney analysis showed that these metabolites were significantly more abundant in male sheep. In contrast, Spearman’s correlation analysis revealed a negative correlation with age but no significant correlation with weight ( Fig. 2D ). Subsequently, we constructed linear regression models to examine metabolites associated with the interaction between sex and weight. In male sheep, the relative abundances of m-tyramine, tricarballylate, serotonin, and 3-sulfo-alanine were positively associated with weight. In contrast, anthranilate and 2,4,6-trihydroxybenzoate were negatively associated ( Fig. 2E ). In contrast, no significant associations between metabolite abundances and weight were observed in female sheep. Phenylalanine metabolism was linked to sheep sex, whereas phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis were associated with sheep age.   We constructed an sPLS-DA model for sex status and sPLS-R models for age and weight to determine how these covariates influenced changes in metabolite abundance. The scores plot for sPLS-DA sex status model demonstrated clear separation across latent variables (LVs), with LV1 accounting for 37% of the variance in sex and allocating the male sheep in the left side of the score plot ( Fig. 3A ). To identify key metabolites contributing to sex status, we prioritized the top 10 metabolites with the highest Variable Importance in Projection (VIP > 1) scores in the sPLS-DA sex ( Supplementary Table S6A ). The metabolites with the highest VIP score for sex status were sedoheptulose and 3-amino-2-piperidone, which were significantly more abundant in male sheep using the Mann-Whitney test (p-value < 0.05).   Figure 3. Sparse PLS models were stratified data based on sex, age, and weight.     Open in a new tab   (A)  Score and VIP plots for sparse PLS by sex. The Mann-Whitney test was applied to the metabolites with the highest VIP score for sex status. Pathway enrichment analysis (MetaboAnalyst) for metabolites with a VIP > 1.  (B)  Score and VIP plots for sparse PLS by sex. Spearman’s correlation analysis was conducted for the metabolites with the highest VIP score for age. Pathway enrichment analysis (MetaboAnalyst) for metabolites with a VIP > 1.  (C)  Score and VIP plots for sparse PLS by weight. Spearman’s correlation analysis was conducted for the metabolites with the highest VIP score for weight. Pathway enrichment analysis (MetaboAnalyst) was performed for metabolites with a VIP > 1. Pathway enrichment analysis of metabolites with VIP>1 in the sPLS-DA sex model identified 'phenylalanine metabolism,' 'phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis', 'glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism' as significantly enriched pathways based on the number of metabolites that successfully mapped to these pathways (p-value < 0.05). Among these, 'phenylalanine metabolism' had the highest pathway impact score (0.60). However, after multiple hypothesis corrections, only 'valine, leucine, and isoleucine biosynthesis' and 'lysine degradation' remained significantly enriched (p-value < 0.05). Still, their pathway impact score was negligible ( Fig. 3A ). Based on the loadings of the sPLS sex model and the location of female and male sheep in the score plot, metabolites such as butyrate/isobutyrate, pantothenate, N6, N6-dimethyllysine, 2’-O-methylguanosine, leucine, glutamate, N, N-dimethyl-5-aminovalerate, imidazole propionate, 3-amino-2-piperidone, and sedoheptulose were strongly associated with female sheep, as indicated by their positive loadings in LV1. In contrast, chrysoeriol, 4-chlorobenzoic acid, N-formylanthranilic acid, indole-3-carboxylate, and uridine 5'-diphosphate (UDP) were associated with male sheep due to their negative loadings in LV1 ( Supplementary Table S6B ).   The score plot for the sPLS-R model for age status demonstrated clear separation across latent variables (LVs), with LV1 accounting for 32% of the variance in age ( Fig. 3B ). It allocated the older sheep in the right panel of the score plot. To identify key metabolites contributing to age status, we prioritized the top 10 metabolites with the highest Variable Importance in Projection (VIP > 1) scores in the sPLS-R age ( Supplementary Table S7A ). The metabolites with the highest VIP score for age 2-hydroxyglutarate and 1-palmitoyl-GPR (16:0), both of which were negatively correlated with sheep age using Spearman’s correlation.   Pathway enrichment analysis of metabolites with VIP>1 in the sPLS-R age model identified 'phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis', 'glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism', 'riboflavin metabolism', and 'arginine biosynthesis' as significantly enriched pathways based on the number of metabolites that successfully mapped to these pathways (p-value < 0.05). However, only the pathways' phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis' and 'arginine biosynthesis' achieved impact scores of 1 and 0.35, respectively, indicating that the matched metabolites occupy structurally important positions within the pathway network, contributing to their overall structural influence. In contrast, other pathways had impact scores below 0.25 ( Fig. 3B ). Based on the loadings of the sPLS-R age model and the location of old and young sheep in the score plot, metabolites such as 2-hydroxyglutarate, 1-palmitoyl-GPE (16:0), o-tyrosine, stachydrine, N-acetylglutamate, sedoheptulose, S-methylcysteine sulfoxide, benzoate were associated with young sheep given their negative loadings in LV1. In contrast, positive loadings for old sheep were metabolites such as imidazole lactate, indolin-2-one, ophthalmate, phenylalanylanine, 3-hydroxybenzoate, N-formylanthranilic acid, and uridine 5'-diphosphate (UDP) ( Supplementary Table S7B ).   The score plot for sPLS-R model for weight status demonstrated clear separation across latent variables (LVs), with LV1 accounting for 19% of the variance in weight ( Fig. 3C ). The model allocated the sheep with increased weight in the right panel of the score plot. To identify key metabolites contributing to weight status, we prioritized the top 10 metabolites with the highest Variable Importance in Projection (VIP > 1) scores in the sPLS-R weight ( Supplementary Table S8A ). The metabolites with the highest VIP score for weight were guanosine and branched chain (14:0) dicarboxylic acid, in which guanosine was positively correlated with sheep weight. In contrast, using Spearman's correlation, the branched-chain (14:0) dicarboxylic acid was negatively correlated with sheep weight.   Metaboanalyst with metabolites quantified with a VIP>1 in the sPLS-R weight model identified 'purine metabolism' as a significantly enriched pathway (p-value < 0.05); however, its structural influence within the pathway network was negligible ( Fig. 3C ). Based on the loadings of the sPLS-R weight model and the location of sheep with more or less weight in the score plot, the metabolites N-formylphenylalanine, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarate, tetradecanedioate (C14), dodecanedioate (C12), and branched-chain 14:0 dicarboxylic acid exhibited negative loading values in LV1, indicating a possible association with sheep with lower weight. Conversely, the metabolites guanosine, adenosine, (3'-5')-uridylyl guanosine, 2'-AMP, uridine 3'-monophosphate (3'-UMP), guanine, cytidine 2',3'-cyclic monophosphate, guanosine 2'-monophosphate (2'-GMP), and uridine showed positive loading values in LV1, with a potential connection to sheep of higher weight ( Supplementary Table S8B ). Multiblock-Y PLS linked phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis to sheep sex, age, and weight, and arginine and proline metabolism with sheep weight.   We constructed a multiblock-Y PLS model to identify relevant metabolites simultaneously driving separation across sex, age, and weight in healthy sheep. We visualized the score plots for the multiblock-Y PLS model in which LV1 and LV2 with colored labels for sex and age ( Fig. 4A ). The score plots demonstrated a precise classification of sheep sex and age across latent variables LV1, accounting for 50% of the variance among these phenotypes. It allocated the male sheep in the first and fourth quadrants of the score plot and the females in the second and third quadrants.   Figure 4. Multiblock-Y PLS model identifying influential metabolites associated with a multivariate response of sex, age, and weight covariates.     Open in a new tab   (A)  Score plots of Multiblock-Y PLS models by sex and age.  (B)  Top 20 metabolites with the highest VIP scores and the most representative loadings from X-LV1 driving the multivariate PLS decomposition for sex and age, along with pathway analysis using metabolites with VIP scores greater than 1.  (C)  Score