>Materials and methods   Poultry ceca acquisition   On day of hatch, Ross 308 broilers (Aviagen, Huntsville, AL, USA) were brought from a commercial hatchery (Welps, Bancroft, IA, USA) to the Poultry Research Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin-Madison (Madison, WI, USA). Chickens were raised based on standard industry guidelines and ethical practices. The animal work for the current study was conducted with a University of Wisconsin-Madison Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved protocol (protocol A006627) to ensure the humane treatment of the birds. Chickens were allowed free access to water and commercial least-cost formulated, double pelleted, corn-soybean meal manufactured diets ( S1 Table ). Cecal samples were obtained from six different 56-day-old chickens, which were humanely euthanized using CO 2 . The collection of these samples was carried out individually using tools that had been immersed in alcohol and sterilized by flame. Following collection, the cecal samples were carefully placed in sterile sample bags (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA). They were subsequently transferred to a portable anaerobic box (Mitsubishi Gas Chemical Co, Japan) which contained oxygen-scrubbing sachets to maintain an anaerobic environment. Immediately after harvest, the cecal samples were transferred to an anaerobic chamber with an atmosphere of 90% nitrogen, 5% H2, and 5% CO2 (Coy Laboratory Products, Grass Lake, MI, USA) for further processing. Media preparation   The selection of the media for evaluating microbial dynamics was based on the methodology established in the prior study conducted by Olson et al. [ 16 ]. To prepare the Anaerobic Dilution Solution (ADS), the following components were used: 0.45 g/L K 2 HPO 4 , 0.45 g/l KH 2 PO 4 , 0.45 g/L (NH 4 )SO 4 , 0.9 g/L NaCl, 0.1875 g/L MgSO 4 -7H 2 O, 0.12 g/L CaCl 2 -2H 2 O, 1 ml/L 0.1% resazurin, 0.05% cysteine-HCl, and 0.4% sodium carbonate [ 17 , 18 ]. Autoclaved ADS was then cooled to room temperature and allowed to equilibrate for 24 hours within an anaerobic chamber (Coy Laboratories, Grass Lake, MI, USA). The chamber was maintained at the same atmosphere as described above, effectively removing all traces of oxygen from the solution. Bacterial cultures   A  C .  jejuni  strain 700819, was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC ® ) and cryogenically preserved in 50% glycerol. To ensure purity,  C .  jejuni  strain was passaged on Charcoal-Cefoperazone-Deoxycholate Agar (mCCDA; Himedia, Mumbai, India) supplemented with 1 mL/L sodium cefoperazone and 200 μL/L amphotericin B through three consecutive cycles. From this purified culture, a single colony was selected and inoculated into 40 mL of Bolton Enrichment Broth (BEB) without antibiotic supplement and then incubated for 48 h at 42°C using an Advanced Anoxomat ™  III system (Advanced Instruments, Norwood, MA, USA) with a microaerophilic atmosphere (5% O 2 , 10% CO 2 , 85% N 2 ). The cultures were subsequently pelleted and resuspended in 400 mL of fresh BEB, followed by incubation for 24 h under the previously described conditions. After the 24 h, the 200 mL of the fresh  C .  jejuni  cultures were aliquoted to 50 mL conical tubes, pelleted, decanted, and resuspended in 200 mL ADS. A 4 mL  C .  jejuni  starter culture of 10 6  CFU/mL was allocated into designated serum bottles after the pre-incubation step described below for a final concentration of 10 5  colony forming units (CFU)/mL. Microaerophilic  in vitro  system for  Campylobacter     The effect of the treatment was evaluated following a well-established protocol for the  C .  jejuni  cecal model, as outlined by Olson et al. and Feye et al. [ 16 , 19 ]. Cecal contents were collected from six individual birds within aseptic chambers, then weighed and diluted at a ratio of 1:3000 by mixing 0.1 g of cecal content with 900 μL of ADS solution. This resuspended cecal material was further diluted by adding 1 mL of it to 299 mL of ADS for each respective cecum sample. A 36 mL aliquot of this diluted cecal content was subsequently transferred into each serum bottle, with or without the addition of 0.4 g of ground chicken feed ( S1 Table ). To create an appropriate environment, the cultures were covered with aluminum foil and placed in Advanced Anoxomat ™  III containers (Advanced Instruments, Norwood, MA, USA), where a microaerobic atmosphere was established, containing 5% O2, 10% CO2, and 85% N2. Incubation was carried out at 42°C with continuous agitation at 150 revolutions per minute (RPM) for 24 hours. This step served as a pre-adaptation to acclimate the naturally occurring microbiota in poultry ceca to the new environment, following the method described previously [ 18 – 20 ]. On the following day, the serum bottles were returned to the anaerobic chamber.   After 24 h of pre-adaption, the serum bottles were moved back into the anaerobic chamber where 4 ml of a freshly prepared 10 6  cells/mL  C .  jejuni  culture resuspended in ADS was added to all bottles except the non-inoculated treatment (NI) for a final concentration of 10 5  CFU/mL. For specific treatments involving casein supplements, 0.1 g of the appropriate vitamin free-casein type (intact (Envigo®, Madison, WI, USA), enzyme hydrolyzed (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, USA), or acid hydrolysate of casein (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, USA) was added to the serum bottles. The study included five distinct treatments: non-inoculated (NI), inoculated with  C .  jejuni  (IN), and three supplemented groups, intact casein (IC), enzyme hydrolysate (EH), acid hydrolysate (AH), that were all inoculated with  C .  jejuni . We opted not to include additional controls for supplemented groups without  Campylobacter , instead using non-inoculated and inoculated treatments without casein supplementations for comparative analyses with the casein-enriched groups. Because  Campylobacter  naturally inhabits poultry cecal compartments [ 21 ], we confirmed the absence of culturable  Campylobacter  in the NI group and confirm the inocula, the 0-hour samples were plated on mCCDA [ 22 ]. At 0, 24, and 48 h post-inoculation, duplicate 1 mL samples were taken for microbiome sequencing and metabolomic analysis. The samples were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until processing. An overview of the procedure is described in  Fig 1 .   Fig 1. Overview of the experimental design and hypotheses of the current study.     Open in a new tab Microbiota sequencing   DNA was extracted from the aseptically collected aliquots of the microaerobic cultures taken at designated time points (0, 24, 48 h) using Qiagen QIAmp Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) as previously described by Olson et al. [ 16 ]. The DNA purity was assessed via a spectrophotometer (Tecan NanoQuant Plate ™ , Mannedorf, Switzerland) and diluted to 10 ng/μL. The paired-end sequencing libraries were arranged by targeting the hypervariable region 4 (V4) of the 16S rRNA gene with PCR primers containing the linker and adapter sequence as described by Olson et al. and Kozich et al. to amplify each DNA sample [ 16 , 23 ]. Sample amplification was verified using gel electrophoresis. PCR products were normalized using a SequalPrep ™  Normalization kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Five μL of each sample was combined to generate a pooled plate library, and concentration was determined using a KAPPA Library Quantification Kit (Kappa Biosystems, Inc., Wilmington, MA). The library and PhiX control v3 were denatured and diluted to 20 pM in HT1 Buffer and 0.2 N fresh NaOH. The library and PhiX control v3 were further diluted in HT1 buffer to generate a final concentration of 6 pM/L. The resulting library was combined with the diluted PhiX control v3 (20%, v/v), and 600 μL was loaded onto a MiSeq v2 (500 cycles) reagent cartridge (Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States). Microbiota bioinformatic analysis   The demultiplexed data were downloaded locally and then transferred to QIIME2 (2021.11) via the Casava1.8 paired-end pipeline [ 24 ]. Within QIIME2, the data were denoised and filtered using DADA2, applying the chimera consensus pipeline [ 25 ]. To evaluate the diversity of the microbial populations, both alpha and beta diversity analyses were conducted. The QIIME2 phylogeny align-to-tree-mafft-fasttree methodology (q2-phylogeny) was employed for this purpose [ 26 ]. For the taxonomic classification of amplicon sequence variants (ASVs), the classify-sklearn tool within QIIME2-2021.11 was utilized in conjunction with the SILVA database (silva-138-99-nb-classifier.qza), employing a 97% confidence threshold [ 27 , 28 ]. Taxonomic data at the genus level were exported from QIIME2 and visualized in JMP Pro 16 (SAS, Cary, North Carolina, USA) with taxa representing less than 1% of the relative abundance being displayed as “other.”   All available metrics related to alpha and beta diversity were computed through QIIME2 diversity core-metrics-phylogeny, with a chosen sampling depth of 6150, retaining 37% (492,000) of features in 80 (95%) samples. The adequacy of this sampling depth was validated by examining alpha rarefaction plots. Additionally, the statistical differences between treatments on the alpha and beta diversities were assessed via q2-diversity. The alpha diversity was analyzed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) to test the interaction of variables via q2-longitudinal [ 29 ]. Alpha diversity was assessed for both richness (using the Shannon Diversity Index) and evenness via Pielou’s Evenness [ 30 ]. Kruskal-Wallis was used to determine pairwise differences [ 31 ]. Differential abundance analysis was performed using ANCOM via q2-composition [ 32 ]. Interaction analysis for beta diversity metrics was carried out using permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) via ADONIS [ 33 ]. Beta diversity metrics were evaluated using quantitative indicators, specifically the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index and the Weighted Unifrac distance matrix [ 34 ], employing the Analysis of Similarity (ANOSIM) function which considers the mean population variation and dispersion [ 35 ]. Microbiota main effects were considered statistically significant if the main effect exhibited a P < 0.05, and the pairwise effect exhibited a Q < 0.05, with each statistical measurement conducted within the QIIME2-2021.11 pipeline. The Q-value reflected the P-value adjusted for a stringent false discovery rate. Both alpha and beta diversity results were compiled and exported from QIIME2 using the metadata tabulate function. All results were uploaded to JMP Pro 16 where volatility plots, boxplots, and principal coordinate plots were generated.   Core microbiota analysis was conducted using core members and the phyloseq package in RStudio Version 1.3 for five different treatment groups. The core microbiota was defined as ASVs representing at least 5% of the population and detected in 50% of the samples. The Venn diagrams were generated via jvenn [ 36 ]. The sequences were submitted to Short Read Archive (PRJNA1018262) under the project title "DNA-Response of Poultry Cecal Microbiota Inoculated with  Campylobacter jejuni . "  Detailed sample identification and descriptions are available in the metadata file uploaded to the Short Read Archive managed by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Metabolite extraction   As larger proteins do not reach lower GIT compartments [ 37 ] and metabolomic changes precede microbial compositional differences [ 38 ], our focus was on EH and AH supplemented groups, along with NI and IN treatments at 0 and 24 h, to describe metabolomic profiles ( Fig 1 ). Cell extraction was performed using 0.5 mL of digesta diluent from samples for 0 and 24 h (total samples (N) = 44). Cell lysis was performed using three freeze-thawing cycles which consisted of thawing at room temperature for 10 min followed by a 30 s sonication on ice. A 1 mL aliquot of an acetonitrile:methanol:water (2:2:1 v/v) solvent mixture was added to cell extracts and sonicated for 30 s and stored at -20°C overnight to allow cellular debris and protein to precipitate. The next day samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 13,000 revolutions per minute (rpm) at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to new Eppendorf tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and dried for 4 h on a SpeedVac Concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA 120). Dried samples were then reconstituted in an acetonitrile:water (1:1 v/v) solvent mixture based on the normalized protein concentration of all samples. Normalized volumes were determined using the Bradford method, where the highest protein concentration is equal to 100 μL. Samples were then vortexed for 30 s, sonicated on ice for 10 min, and centrifuged for 15 min at 13,000 RPM at 4°C to remove any residual debris. The metabolite extracts were transferred into autosampler vials with inserts and stored at -80°C until analysis. Untargeted metabolomics   Metabolite extracts were analyzed with ultra-high-performance liquid orbitrap chromatography mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS) (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer). A Kinetex Core-Shell 100 Å column C-18 column (1 x 150 mm, 1.7 μm, Phenomenex) was used for separation of metabolites in positive mode. Sample injection volume was 3 μL/min at a flow rate of 0.250 mL/min. Mobile phase A was composed of water with 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B was 0.1% in acetonitrile. The gradient began with 5% B from 0–3 min, followed by an increase and held to 95% B until 18 min, followed by a decrease to 5% B at 18.50 min and hold at 5% B until 22 min. Data-dependent acquisition was used for the tandem MS workflow. The MS1 spectra were matched to spectra and compounds in the Human Metabolome Database using MetaboAnalyst 5.0.   MetaboAnalyst 5.0 was used for statistical analysis (P < 0.05). The raw files were converted to mzXML files and centroided (MS-1, orbitrap, positive mode) using ProteoWizard version 3.0 [ 39 ]. Pairwise comparisons were performed to investigate potential differences of metabolite features between treatment groups using t-test and volcano plots for visualization of the results. Functional analysis was conducted using Mummichog 2.0 (with a significance threshold of P-value < 0.00001) utilizing the KEGG  Escherichia coli  library within MetaboAnalyst. To identify dysregulated microbial metabolites and metabolic pathways, metabolite features were annotated using Compound Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and subsequently mapped to the metabolic pathways of representative cecal bacterial members  C .  jejuni jejuni 51037 ,  F .  prausnitzii  A2-165, and  P .  faecium  JCM 30894 in BioCyc [ 37 ]. Results   Casein supplements exerted a significant influence on microbial composition   In this study, we investigated the influence of different molecular sizes of casein proteins—namely intact casein, enzyme hydrolysate of casein, and acid hydrolysate of casein—on the cecal microbial composition inoculated with  C .  jejuni  over a 48-hour period under microaerophilic conditions (total (N) = 84, treatments (k) = 5). To discern potential combined effects of time and treatment on microbial compositions, we employed ANOVA for assessing variable interactions related to evenness and richness parameters within the samples. This revealed there was no significant interaction between treatment and time on microbial richness (ANOVA, Shannon’s Entropy; P > 0.05,  S2 Table ). However, a trend towards a significant interaction between time and treatment was observed in regard to microbial evenness (ANOVA, Pielou’s Evenness; P = 0.09,  S2 Table ). When considered individually, treatment drove a significant effect on microbial evenness and richness (P < 0.05,  S2 Table ). Additionally, when compared to the NI and IN treatments, which exhibited a decline in microbial homogeneity and richness over time, the supplemented groups demonstrated a sustained homogeneity and richness of microbial populations ( Fig 2A and 2B ). Additionally, ADONIS was utilized to examine phylogenetic diversity and abundance disparities between the samples. Time and treatment exhibited a significant interaction concerning non-phylogenetic-based microbial abundance, as evidenced by the Bray-Curtis analysis (P < 0.05,  S3 Table ), while no such significance was observed for phylogenetic-based diversity analysis via Weighted Unifrac (P > 0.05,  S3 Table ). When evaluated individually, treatment demonstrated a significant effect on the phylogenetic composition of microbial communities (P < 0.05,  S3 Table ). Diverse responses were observed in microbial abundance among the treatment groups. The NI group exhibited stability over time, while both the IN and IC groups initially experienced a decrease in microbial abundance at 24 h, followed by a recovery to their original levels by 48 hours. Conversely, the EH and AH groups demonstrated stability at 24 h but exhibited a decline by the 48-h mark ( Fig 2C ). Additionally, while the phylogenetic composition of most groups increased with time, the IN treatment exhibited a decreasing trend in phylogenetic composition over time ( Fig 2D ). These findings reveal that  C .  jejuni -inoculated microbial communities, subjected to supplementation with casein hydrolysates, exhibit significant alterations in microbial evenness and richness, impacting abundance dynamics and phylogenetic composition of microbial communities over time.   Fig 2. Volatility plots depict the fluctuations in the microbial composition and diversity.     Open in a new tab   T he microbial compositional analysis included: Richness (a) and evenness (b) of the microbial community for five treatments (non-inoculated (NI), inoculated (IN), intact casein (IC), enzyme hydrolysate (EH), and acid hydrolysate (AH) across time points (0, 24, and 48 h), utilizing alpha-diversity metrics to capture changes within the samples. Meanwhile, Figure c and d illustrate microbial abundance and phylogenetic compositional changes between the samples, respectively, based on beta-diversity metrics. The whiskers associated with each time point represent the standard deviation for each treatment. Insights from cecal inoculation with  C .  jejuni  and its minimal impact on microbial community diversity and the metabolome   Before addressing the main objective of the current study, which focuses on the effects of peptide supplementation on a cecal microbiota inoculated with  C .  jejuni , we first aimed to understand the impact of  C .  jejuni  on the cecal system without casein supplementation. This allowed us to assess if the presence of  C .  jejuni  alone influences changes in microbial composition and metabolomic-based outputs. The inoculation of cecal contents with  C .  jejuni  did not drive a significant impact on the microbial evenness and richness when compared to the NI treatment (Pielous’s Evenness, P > 0.05; Shannon’s Entropy, P > 0.05,  Fig 3A and 3b ;  S4 Table ). Additionally, neither microbial abundance nor taxonomy were significantly changed in response to the presence of  C .  jejuni  within the cecal microbial community (Bray-Curtis, P > 0.05,  Fig 3C ; Weighted Unifrac, P > 0.05,  Fig 3D ;  S5 Table ). Significantly, the abundance of C. jejuni stood out from the other 161 identified taxa in this study (ANCOM, P < 0.05). On average, 206 ASVs were associated with  C .  jejuni  abundance in the IN group, contrasting sharply with the mere 2.5 ASVs observed in the NI group ( Fig 3E ).   Fig 3. Microbial diversity and composition associated with the supplementation of acid and enzyme hydrolysates, and intact casein.     Open in a new tab   The effect of treatments, non-inoculated (NI), inoculated (IN), intact casein (IC), enzyme hydrolysate (EH), and acid hydrolysate (AH), on alpha diversity, microbial evenness ( a , Pielou’s Evenness) and richness ( b , Shannon’s Diversity); beta diversity, differences in abundance ( c , Bray Curtis) and phylogenetic composition ( d , Weighted Unifrac); and differentially abundant taxa, ANCOM ( e ), which identified  Campylobacter  as significantly differentially abundant 163 other identified taxa (P < 0.05) where the y-axis denotes  Campylobacter  abundance as amplicon sequencing variants (ASVs). The shaded boxplots represent the standard deviations, and the solid lines represent the mean. Significant differences are denoted by the connecting letters a-b. As shown in  Fig 4 , among the 161 observed taxa, 15 distinct taxa were identified, with each representing at least 1% of the microbial population associated with the treatments ( S6 Table ). However, to assess disparities in core microbial populations, we conducted an analysis focusing on core microbial members at each time point within each treatment. Specifically, we considered ASVs that constituted at least 5% of the population and were consistently present in 50% of the samples, thus qualifying as core members of the microbial community. The stringent parameters for core microbiota assessment were established based on the consistent increase in abundance of  C .  jejuni  observed in the casein-supplemented groups at each time point. Therefore, the conservative core microbial parameters were defined to effectively isolate  C .  jejuni  from the core microbial population at any given time point. At the onset (0 hours,  Fig 5 ), there were five core microbial members common to both the NI and IN treatments, collectively representing approximately 45% of the total community. Notably, the treatments diverged by three core members, with  Campylobacter  being exclusive to the IN group. Progressing to the 24-h mark, the treatments shared eight common core microbial members, comprising approximately 89% of the total community membership, where the IN treatment uniquely contained  Campylobacter . The common core microbial community members at 24 h consisted of Enterobacteriaceae, Oscillospiraceae,  Faecalibacterium , Clostridiaceae, Lachnospiraceae,  Enterococcus ,  Bacteroides , and  Ruminococcus torques  group. By the 48-h mark, the common core microbial community narrowed to five members, making up 56% of the total population ( Fig 5 ). In this phase, the IN group exclusively featured  Phascolarctobacterium ,  Faecalibacterium , and  Bacteroides , while the NI group contained  Oscillibacter  ( S7 Table ).   Fig 4. Highly represented genera (>1%) among poultry cecal  in vitro  systems associated with treatments.