>Methods   Metabolic reaction network   The metabolic reaction network is a network for metabolite-to-metabolite-based enzymatic reactions, and it was constructed using the KEGG database. The KEGG compound database was downloaded using an R package KEGGREST in Bioconductor on 7 March 2017. We have provided this version of KEGG compound database as an R file named as kegg.compound in Supplementary Data  9 . In one metabolic reaction, the substrate and product metabolites are paired according to their structural similarity, and defined as one reaction pair (or reactant pair, RP). The KEGG reaction pair database was originally defined as RPAIR in KEGG 32 . This database was also obtained using the R package KEGGREST on 7 March 2017. We have also provided this version of KEGG reaction pair database as an R file named as kegg.rpair in Supplementary Data  10 . We did not filter any reaction pairs from the KEGG reaction pair database, and all of reaction pairs were directly imported into R package igraph [ https://igraph.org/r/ ] to construct the MRN. In the MRN, one node represents one metabolite, and one edge represents one reaction pair. Two metabolites connected by one edge indicate that they are reaction-paired neighbor metabolites. Finally, the MRN contains 7639 formulas (nodes) and 9603 reaction pairs (edges) in total. However, 1200 out of 7639 formulas were not organic molecules or the metabolites with a strict chemical structure, so the chemical space for MetDNA is 6439 metabolites in total. Detailed information of all the reaction pairs in the MRN is provided in Supplementary Data  11  and Supplementary Data  10 . Data import   MetDNA requires the import of an MS1 peak table (.csv format) and MS2 data files (.mgf or .msp format). The MS1 peak table is a list of metabolic peaks with annotated  m / z  and RTs. The MS1 peak table is generated from the raw MS files using common peak picking software such as XCMS 27  and MS-DIAL 36 . MS2 data files (.mgf format) are converted from MS raw files using ProteoWizard [ http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/ ] (version 3.0.6150). MS2 data from different data acquisition methods such as DDA, DIA, or targeted MS2 acquisition are all supported. If MS-DIAL is used for peak picking in DIA data, the generated MS2 data files (.msp format) are also supported by MetDNA. The details and examples about the generation of the MS1 peak table and MS2 data files are provided in Supplementary Note  7 . Annotation of initial seed metabolites   With the imported MS1 peak table and MS2 data, MetDNA first matches the MS1 peaks with MS2 spectra according to their  m / z  (±25 ppm) and RT (±10 s) values. If one MS1 peak matches multiple MS2 spectra, the most abundant MS2 spectrum is selected. In MetDNA, the intensities of the top 10 abundant fragment ions are summed up to represent the abundance of MS2 spectra. If one uses MS-DIAL for the peak picking and outputting MS2 data (.msp format), then the MS1–MS2 match step is skipped by MetDNA. The generated MS1/MS2 pairs are matched with our in-house standard spectral library for metabolite annotation. The match tolerance for the MS1  m / z  value is set as ±25 ppm. We compared four different scoring methods to evaluate MS2 spectra similarity (see Supplementary Note  1 ), and found that DP score is an appropriate one. So the modified DP function 23  is used to score the similarity between the experimental spectrum and the standard spectrum in the library (Eq.  1 ). The DP score ranges from 0 to 1, from no match to a perfect match. The intensities of the fragment ions in the MS2 spectra are rescaled so that the highest fragment ion is set to 1.     Dot product = ∑ W S W E ∑ W S 2 W E 2 ,   1     where weighted intensity vector,  W  = [relative intensity of fragment ion] n [ m / z  value] m ,  n  = 1,  m  = 0; S = standard, and E = experiment. DP scores from both forward and reverse matches are generated. Metabolite annotations with DP scores in either forward or reverse matches larger than 0.8 are kept. Usually, 50–200 metabolites are annotated using the standard spectral library. The annotations are further filtered using the theoretical RTs of the metabolites (±30%). The generation of the theoretical RTs is provided below. The remaining annotations are used as initial seed metabolites in round 0 for MRN-based recursive annotation. The seed metabolites are defined as the annotated metabolites that provide their MS2 spectra as surrogate MS2 spectra for the annotation of their reaction-paired neighbor metabolites. Annotation of isotope and adduct peaks   First, the isotope peaks of seed metabolites are annotated by MetDNA (Supplementary Fig.  2 ). For each seed metabolite, the program calculates the theoretical  m / z  and the relative intensities of isotope peaks from the formula using the binomial and McLaurin expansion (R package Rdisop). Only four isotope peaks ([M] to [M+4]) are calculated. The generated isotope peaks of seed metabolites are used to match all the MS1 peaks in the MS1 peak table according to the  m / z , RT and relative intensity. The default tolerances for the  m / z , RT, and relative intensity are set as ±25 ppm, ±3 s, and ±500%, respectively. The large tolerance for the relative intensity match is due to the inaccuracy of the experimental intensity ratios for the isotope peaks 37 , 38 .   The matched isotope peaks are assigned the annotation scores (Score iso ) shown below:     Score iso = Score m ∕ z W m ∕ z + Score RT W RT + Score int W int ,   2     where Score m / z  represents the  m / z  match score and is calculated as follows:     Score m ∕ z = 1 - m z E - m z T × 10 6 ∕ mz T Tolerance m ∕ z ,   3     mz E  and  mz T  are the experimental  m / z  and theoretical  m / z , respectively. The Tolerance m / z  represents the tolerance for the  m / z  match with a default value of 25 ppm.   Score RT  represents the RT match score and is calculated as follows:     Score RT = 1 - RT E - RT T Tolerance RT ,   4     where RT E  and RT T  are the experimental RT and theoretical RT, respectively. The Tolerance RT  represents the tolerance of RT match with a default value of 3 seconds.   Score int  represents the relative intensity match score and is calculated as follows:     Score int = 1 - Int E - Int T × 100 ∕ Int T Tolerance int ,   5     Int E  and Int T  are the experimental relative intensity and theoretical relative intensity, respectively. The Tolerance int  represents the relative intensity match tolerance with a default value of 500%.  W m / z ,  W RT , and  W int  represent the weights of Score m / z , Score RT , and Score int , respectively, and the default values are 0.45, 0.45, and 0.1, respectively.   Second, MetDNA calculates the possible  m / z  values for the adduct peaks of seed metabolites. The adduct table for different LC separations (HILIC or RP) and polarities (positive and negative) are listed in Supplementary Table  5 . All the possible adduct peaks of the seed metabolites are then matched to the MS1 peak table according to their  m / z  and RT. The default tolerances for the  m / z  and RT are ± 25 ppm and ±3 s, respectively. The annotations of the adduct peaks are also assigned annotation scores (Score adduct ) as follows:     Score adduct = Score m ∕ z W m ∕ z + Score RT W RT ,   6     where Score m / z  represents the  m / z  match score and is calculated as indicated in Eq. ( 3 ). Score RT  represents the RT match score and is calculated using Eq. ( 4 ).  W m / z  and  W RT  represent the weights of Score m / z  and Score RT , respectively, and the default values are 0.8 and 0.2, respectively.   Third, after the annotation of the adduct peak, the isotope peak annotation for each adduct peak is also performed using the same procedures described above.   The annotation of in-source fragmentation is not included in MetDNA. But some in-source fragmentations can be well differentiated using the RT. For example, RTs for tryptamine and tryptophan are 325.1 and 446.7 s, respectively, which generate an RT error of 37.2%. In MetDNA, true tryptamine and tryptamine from the in-source fragmentation can be well differentiated using the RTs. Annotation of reaction-paired neighbor metabolites   Two metabolites in one reaction pair are neighbor metabolites. The seed metabolites provide their experimental MS2 spectra as surrogate spectra to annotate their neighbor metabolites. First, the initial seed metabolites are mapped to MRN and retrieve their neighbor metabolites from MRN. The reaction step is defined as the number of reactions between two metabolites. All the neighbor metabolites with one reaction step are retrieved. The MS2 spectra of the seed metabolites are assigned to their corresponding neighbor metabolites as surrogate MS2 spectra. The precursor  m/z  was calculated for the neighbor metabolites according to the possible adduct (such as [M+H] +  or [M+Na] + ) in the LC condition (HILIC or RP) and ionization polarity. In addition, RTs for the neighbor metabolites were also predicted. For each neighbor metabolite, the generated theoretical  m / z , predicted RT (from RT prediction), and surrogate MS2 spectrum are matched to the experimental MS1  m / z  (default tolerance: ±25 ppm), RT (default tolerance: ±30%), and MS2 spectrum (default tolerance: 0.5). If one seed metabolite leads to no annotation of a neighbor metabolite with one reaction step, then neighbor metabolites with two reaction steps are further retrieved. The default value of the maximum reaction step is 3. The annotations of neighbor metabolites are assigned the annotation scores shown below:     Score iden = Score m ∕ z W m ∕ z + Score RT W RT + Score spec W spec ,   7     where Score m / z ,  W m / z , and  W RT  are the same as in Eq. (2). Score RT  is calculated as follows:     Score RT = 1 - RT E - RT T × 100 ∕ RT T Tolerance RT ,   8     where RT E  and RT T  are the experimental RT and theoretical RT, respectively. The Tolerance RT  represents the tolerance of RT match with a default value of 30%.   Score spec  is the MS2 spectral match score, which is scored using a dot-product function (Eq. ( 1 )) with some modifications. If the  m / z  value of seed metabolite is larger than the neighbor metabolite, the fragment ions in the surrogate MS2 spectrum with  m / z  larger than that of the neighbor metabolite are removed. Vice versa, the fragment ions in the experimental MS2 spectrum with  m / z  larger than that of seed metabolite are also removed.  W spec  is the weight of Score spec . The default values of  W m / z ,  W RT , and  W spec  are 0.25, 0.25, and 0.5, respectively. The annotations of each MS1 peak are ranked by Score iden . After the annotation of neighbor metabolites, isotope peak annotation is also performed for each neighbor metabolite using the same procedures described above. Selection of seed metabolites and recursive annotation   After one round of annotation, new seed metabolites are selected from the annotated neighbor metabolites to start recursive annotation (Fig.  1c ). Peaks with new annotations are selected as seed metabolites. MetDNA then repeats the neighbor metabolite identification and isotope peak annotation until there are no new seed metabolites available for the next round of annotation. Confidence assignment   MetDNA uses a multi-step strategy to evaluate the confidence of the metabolite annotation. First, all the annotated MS1 peaks are grouped according to their annotation and RT. The MS1 peaks with the same metabolite annotations are grouped together and further divided into different peak groups according to their RT. The peak group is defined as a set of peaks (e.g., monoisotope peak, isotope peaks, and adduct peaks) with the same annotation and in the same RT window (default is 3 s). If one peak has multiple annotations, it may belong to multiple peak groups. Similarly, one metabolite may also belong to multiple peak groups. The confidence is then assigned to each peak group and all MS1 peaks in the group according to the following rules:     Grade 1: at least one MS1 peak in the peak group is annotated through the standard spectral library (or initial seed metabolite);   Grade 2: do not meet rule 1, and there are isotope peaks available in the peak group;   Grade 3: do not meet rules 1 and 2, and there are reliable adduct peaks in the peak group, such as [M+H] + , [M+Na] +  or [M+NH 4 ] +  for positive mode, and [M-H] − , [M+Cl] − , or [M+CH 3 COO] −  for negative mode, respectively; and   Grade 4: the remaining peak groups that do not meet rules 1, 2, or 3.   Redundancy removal   Annotation redundancy includes peak redundancy and metabolite redundancy. Peak redundancy is defined as the total number of metabolite annotations divided by the total number of peaks with annotations, that is, the number of metabolites per peak. By contrast, the metabolite redundancy is defined as the total number of peak groups with annotation divided by the total number of metabolite annotations, that is, the number of peak groups per metabolite. MetDNA then removes the annotation redundancy according to the confidence levels of the peak group and the peaks in the group. First, if one metabolite matches multiple peak groups, the program removes the annotation from all the peaks in the peak groups with grade 4. However, if all of the matched peak groups are grade 4, all the annotations are maintained. Second, if one peak matches multiple metabolites, the annotations with the highest grade are kept. After the removal of the annotation redundancy, the constitution of the peak groups may change. The confidence assignment is then repeated, followed by a repetition of the redundancy removal process, which is also a recursive process. The recursive process continues until the annotation redundancy remains unchanged. The annotation redundancy is calculated as the mean value of the peak redundancy and the metabolite redundancy. Identification of dysregulated pathways   A pathway enrichment analysis is used to identify and characterize the dysregulated metabolic pathways. First, dysregulated peaks with annotations are selected according to a univariate test (Student’s  t -test or Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test) with or without FDR correction. The maximum tolerance of  P  values can be set by the users. A volcano plot is provided to demonstrate the distributions of the dysregulated peaks. Second, the metabolite annotations from the dysregulated peaks are mapped to the KEGG metabolic pathways. Currently, MetDNA contains the pathway information for 16 biological species (Supplementary Data  12 ). The hypergeometric test is used to evaluate whether the dysregulated metabolites are enriched in one pathway 39 . The  P  value from the hypergeometric test is also calculated for each pathway. The dysregulated pathways with  P  values less than 0.05 are output as dysregulated pathways. The information for dysregulated pathways is output into the file named Pathway.enrichment.analysis. Quantitative analysis of dysregulated pathway   MetDNA utilizes the quantitative information from the MS1 peaks to characterize the expression levels of the dysregulated pathways in a quantitative fashion. First, all the peak intensities are Pareto-scaled. If one peak group has multiple MS1 peaks, then the most abundant peak is selected to represent the quantity of the peak group. Second, if one metabolite matches multiple peaks, then the peak with the highest annotation score (Score iden ) is selected to represent the metabolite. Third, the expression level of one dysregulated pathway is calculated as the average value of all the metabolites in the pathway. The quantitative results for the metabolites and pathways are output into two files named Quantitative.pathway.metabolite.result and Quantitative.pathway.result, respectively. Predicting the RT   To obtain the theoretical RTs of all the metabolites in the MRN, MetDNA utilizes the quantitative structure–retention relationship (QSRR) to construct a prediction model to generate theoretical RTs 40 , 41 . The RTs of metabolites under liquid chromatography (LC) highly depend on their structures and physiochemical properties, which can be described quantitatively using molecular descriptors (MDs). With the QSRR prediction model, the input of a set of MD values for one metabolite could generate the theoretical RT. This approach requires the following data to establish a prediction model: (1) a training dataset containing a number of metabolites with experimental RTs; (2) a machine-learning-based algorithm; and (3) the MDs of metabolites. The detailed steps for the RT prediction are described below.   Step 1. Calculating the MDs. The R package rcdk [ https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rcdk/index.html ] is used to calculate the MDs of the metabolites from their SMILES structures. The SMILESs of metabolites from the in-house spectral library and the MRN were obtained using the Identifier Exchange Service of PubChem [ https://pubchemdocs.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/identifier-exchange-service ]. A total of 346 MDs are calculated for each metabolite.   Step 2. Obtain a training dataset. The annotated metabolites through the spectral match are used as the training dataset to establish the prediction model. If one MS1 peak has multiple metabolite annotations, or vice versa, then the unique metabolite annotation is selected using the following criteria: (1) if one MS1 peak has multiple annotations, the one with the highest DP score is kept; (2) if one metabolite matched to multiple MS1 peaks, then the one with the highest intensity is kept; and (3) metabolite annotations with reliable adducts, such as [M+H] + , [M+Na] + , and [M+NH 4 ] +  in positive ionization and [M-H] − , [M+CH3COO] − , and [M+Cl] −  in negative ionization are selected. For the metabolites in the training dataset, MDs with more than 50% missing values (MVs) across all metabolites are removed. The remaining MVs in the training dataset are imputed using the KNN algorithm (with the R package impute). The MDs with the same values across all the metabolites are also removed. As a result, a training dataset is obtained, including a set of metabolites with experimental RTs, and the MDs for the metabolites are calculated.   Step 3. Optimize the combination of MDs for prediction. A machine-learning-based algorithm known as the random forest (RF) is used to develop the prediction model. First, the combination of MDs is optimized for prediction. An RF model is constructed using MDs as independent variables and RTs as dependent variables (with the R package randomForest). Approximately 68% of the metabolites are randomly selected as the internal training dataset, and the remaining metabolites are used as the internal test dataset. An importance value is assigned to each MD to evaluate its contribution to the prediction model. The model construction is repeated 100 times. Each time, the top five ranked MDs according to the importance values are recorded. The MDs that appear > 50 times in 100 RF models are selected as the optimized MD combination. Using the datasets in our lab, we optimized two combinations of MDs for HILIC and reverse phase (RP) separations, respectively. The optimized