>MATERIALS AND METHODS   MyOne TM  Tosyl activated Dynabeads were from Life Technologies. Lectins AAL, BPL, DSA, EPHA, GNL, JAC, LPHA, MAA, NPL, SNA, STL, and UEA were from Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA. Modified sequencing grade trypsin was from Promega, Madison, WI. Protein assay Bradford reagent, Triton X-100, and sodium dodecyl sulfate solution were from Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA. Tris base, glycine, sodium chloride, and acrylamide/bis-acrylamide solution 40% 29:1 were from Amresco, Solon, OH. Glycerol, disodium hydrogen phosphate dihydrate, sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihydrate, calcium chloride dehydrate, and Tween-20 were from Ajax Finechem, NSW, Australia. Magnesium chloride and manganese chloride were from Univar. For quadrupole time of flight runs, acetonitrile, isocratic HPLC grade was from Scharlau and for triple quadrupole runs, acetonitrile CHROMASOLV ®  gradient grade was from Sigma, St. Louis, MO. Heavy labeled stable isotope-labeled standard (SIS) peptides were from Sigma. All other reagents including lectins not listed above were from Sigma unless otherwise specified.       Serum Glycoprotein Biomarker Discovery and Qualification Pipeline   Fig. 1  represents the integrated glycoprotein biomarker discovery and qualification pipeline developed using LeMBA. The discovery phase aimed to identify changes in the lectin binding of medium to high abundance serum proteins that can distinguish between different phenotypes. To enable economic and high throughput label-free quantitation while controlling for sample processing, including tryptic digestion, we employed a nonlabeled spiked-in glycoprotein standard at the very first step of the workflow prior to denaturation ( Fig. 1 ). Pilot experiments identified chicken ovalbumin as a suitable internal standard, with low homology to species of interest (human or mouse) that bound to all 20 lectins experimentally. Optimization experiments determined that 10 picomole ovalbumin to be added to each sample (50 μg of serum) per lectin pull-down. Depending upon the individual lectin, between 3 and 5 ovalbumin peptides (out of 7) were used for normalization ( supplemental Table S1 ). Details about the data normalization and statistical analyses platforms GlycoSelector and Shiny mixOmics can be found in Supplemental Methods.   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Generalized workflow schematic for serum glycoprotein biomarker discovery and qualification.  Serum samples from respective patient groups were enriched for sub-glycoproteomes using 20 individual lectin coated magnetic beads, followed by on-bead trypsin digest and tandem mass spectrometry for label-free quantitation referencing to internal standard chicken ovalbumin. In-house database and statistical analysis pipeline ”GlycoSelector“ ( http://glycoselector.di.uq.edu.au/ ) identified lectin–protein pairs present in one patient group and absent in the other. Sparse partial least squares-discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA) combined with stability analysis was used to generate ranked lists of lectin–protein candidates. For biomarker qualification, selected candidates were measured using multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) in an independent patient cohort for a subgroup of lectin pull-downs. Dedicated statistical analysis tool ”Shiny mixOmics“ ( http://mixomics-projects.di.uq.edu.au/Shiny ) was developed incorporating tools to plot receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and to perform univariate/multivariate statistical analyses. LeMBA-immunoblotting (IB) was used as an orthogonal method to verify peptide level MS data for selected candidates at the protein level. Briefly, for discovery data, two different normalization approaches (1) based upon total ovalbumin protein intensity or (2) using individual ovalbumin peptide intensity were evaluated ( supplemental Fig. S1 A ). There was a strong correlation between the two normalization approaches ( supplemental Fig. S1 B ), and we selected the second normalization method for the pipeline as it gave equal weighting to each peptide. For each patient sample in discovery stage, a two-dimensional data set was generated, consisting of normalized intensity for proteins identified with each of the 20 lectin pull-down procedures. In general, glycoproteins bound several lectins, reflecting heterogeneity and multiplicity of glycosylation. GlycoSelector is a customized database with an incorporated statistical analysis pipeline coded in the R statistical programming language ( 38 ) and integrated in PHP server-side scripting language. The pipeline is based on tools developed in mixOmics ( 39 ), an R package dedicated to multivariate statistical analysis of “omics” data, and includes several steps such as data normalization, sample outlier detection, multivariate statistical analysis and group binding analyses. The sample outlier detection step aims to identify possible errors in sample handling/processing ( supplemental Fig. S2 ). As an example of its utility, sample run ID 63 shown in  supplemental Fig. S2 A  to S2 D  was considered to be an outlier because of consistent anomalous results detected in all four graphical outputs. The error was at the mass spectrometry step, because when the sample was re-run after mass spectrometer re-calibration, it was no longer detected as an outlier ( supplemental Fig. S2 E  to S2 H ). To determine changes in the lectin binding of individual proteins between the different conditions, GlycoSelector was designed with two parallel approaches. Firstly, Group Binding Difference analyses were performed to identify on-off changes. In addition, multivariate statistical analysis based on sparse partial least square-discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA) ( 40 ) coupled with stability analysis was used to identify qualitative changes, after the exclusion of common contaminant proteins ( supplemental Table S3 ).   Based on GlycoSelector analysis, a subset of 6 lectins and 41 glycoprotein candidates were selected for independent qualification ( Fig. 1 ). The steps included, (1) MRM-MS assay development including confirmation of linearity and reproducibility, (2) screening an independent cohort of patient samples using customized LeMBA-MRM-MS, (3) two-step data normalization ( supplemental Fig. S1 A  and supplemental Methods ), and (4) univariate and multivariate statistical analysis using Shiny mixOmics. Lectin Magnetic Bead Array (LeMBA)   LeMBA was performed as previously reported ( 12 ,  13 ) with modifications detailed in  supplemental Methods  section. LC-MS/MS and Database Search for Biomarker Discovery   The LeMBA pull-down samples were resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% v/v formic acid for LC-MS/MS (Agilent 6520 quadrupole time of flight (QTOF) coupled with a Chip Cube and 1200 HPLC). Initial experiments were performed to determine the optimal amount of tryptic peptides for LC-MS/MS: 9 μl were loaded for HAA, HPA, and UEA, 6 μl for NPL, STL, GNL, 5 μl for BPL, DSA, ECA, MAA, SBA, WFA, and WGA, 4 μl for AAL, SNA, LPHA, PSA, and JAC, 1 μl for EPHA and ConA. The nano pump was set at 0.3 μl/min and the capillary pump at 4 μl/min. The HPLC-chip used contains 160 nl C18 trapping column, and 75 μm × 150 mm 300 Å C18 analytical column (G4240–62010 Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Buffer A was 0.1% v/v formic acid and Buffer B was 90% v/v acetonitrile containing 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient from 6% B to 46% B at 45 min. Nano pump %B was increased to 95%B at 45.5 min and plateaued till 55.5 min, then decreased to 6% B at 58.5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in 2 GHz extended dynamic range and programmed to acquire 8 precursor MS1 spectra per second and 4 MS/MS spectra for each MS1 spectra. Dynamic exclusion was applied after 2 MS/MS within 0.25 min. Exclusion for lectin peptides was applied as reported previously ( 12 ). The QTOF was tuned and calibrated prior to analysis. One hundred femtomole/μl of predigested bovine serum albumin peptides were used as quality control, before and after each plate. Levels of reference ions 299.2945 and 1221.9906 were maintained at minimum 5000 and 1000 counts respectively.   The raw data was extracted and searched using Spectrum Mill MS proteomics workbench (Agilent Technologies, Rev.B.04.00.127) against Swissprot human database containing 20,242 entries (release 3 rd  Jan 2012). Similar MS/MS spectra acquired on the precursor  m / z  within ± 1.4  m / z  and within ± 15 s were merged. The following parameters were used for the search: Trypsin for digestion of proteins, 2 maximum missed cleavages, minimum matched peak intensity of 50%, precursor mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm, product mass tolerance of ± 50 ppm, calculate reversed database scores enabled and dynamic peak thresholding enabled. Carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification and oxidized methionine was selected as a variable modification. Precursor mass shift range from −17.0 Da to 177.0 Da was allowed for variable modification. Results were filtered by protein score > 15, peptide score > 6, and % scored peak intensity (% SPI) > 60. Automatic validation was used to validate proteins and peptides with default settings and false discovery rates (FDRs) were calculated using reversed hits. BE-EAC Biomarker Qualification Using LeMBA-MRM-MS   Multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) assay was performed on Agilent Technologies 6490 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled with 1290 standard-flow infinity UHPLC fitted with a standard-flow ESI (Jet Stream) source to qualify candidate proteins for customized list of six lectin pull-downs (AAL, EPHA, JAC, NPL, PSA, and WGA) in an independent patient cohort. LeMBA was performed as described in Supplemental Methods. During MRM method development and validation stages, LeMBA pull-down of multiple lectins was combined and injected. Protein, Peptide, and Transition Selection for MRM Method Development   Proteins identified using GlycoSelector with either of the above six lectins were selected for qualification. In addition, a few other proteins that were identified as candidate biomarkers with other lectins were also included for qualification.   MRM selector function of Spectrum Mill was used to retrieve the top ten peptides per protein for MRM method development, using several runs from the LeMBA-QTOF discovery data set. The parameters specified included 10 peptides per protein with a score of above 10 and % score peak intensity of 70%. The top four product y-ions for each precursor ion greater than precursor m/z were selected for MRM method development. The formula Collision energy (CE) = 0.036  m / z  −4.8 was used to calculate CE for each precursor. Multiple MRM methods consisting of maximum 200 transitions were created as a first step of method development. All methods were transferred across to Skyline software version 2.1.0.4936 ( http://skyline.maccosslab.org/ ) for visualization, subsequent method refinement and analysis ( 41 ). Using LeMBA-MS/MS discovery data (.mzxml and .pepxml files), a reference spectral library was built in Skyline. This reference library was used to compare the peptide fragmentation pattern in the MRM method as compared with QTOF data, and also to rank transitions. LeMBA pull-down from each of the 6 lectins was combined and run for each method to identify best MRM transitions. Each method incorporated transitions for internal standard chicken ovalbumin. Retention time prediction calculator iRT-C18 of Skyline was used to increase confidence of peptide identification ( 42 ). iRT scale was calibrated using the known retention time of the peptides and based on this calibration plot, retention time for the peptide of interest was predicted. MRM transitions showing good response at the correct retention time without any interference were selected for the next step. After the first round of method development, three MRM methods were created and each of these methods was run three times to find transitions showing stable responses. Some product y-ions (greater than precursor  m / z ) showed considerably low response. So to find out transition with higher response, up to five b- and y-ions less than precursor m/z were tried. Only transitions showing stable response during multiple runs were selected. Using retention time information for each peptide, one final dynamic MRM method was created incorporating a total of 145 peptides and 465 transitions with delta retention times of 2.5, 3 or 4 min, to quantify 41 proteins.  supplemental Table S6  contains a detailed list of transitions used in the method. LC Method Development   The UHPLC system consisted of a reverse phase chromatographic column AdvanceBio Peptide Mapping (150 × 2.1 mm i.d., 2.7 μm, part number 653750–902, Agilent Technologies) with a 5 mm long guard column. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The UHPLC system was operated at 60 °C, with a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. The gradient used for peptide separation was as follows: 3% B at 0 min; 30% B at 20 min; 40% B at 24 min; 95% B at 24.5 min; 95% B at 28.5 min; 3% B at 29 min; followed by conditioning of columns for 5 min at 3% B before injecting the next sample. Mass Spectrometer Settings   Agilent 6490 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and controlled by Agilent's MassHunter Work station software (version B.06.00 build 6.0.6025.4 SP4). The MRM acquisition parameters were 150 V high pressure RF, 60 V low pressure RF, 4000 V capillary voltage, 300 V nozzle voltage, 11 L/min sheath gas flow at a temperature of 250 °C, 15 L/min drying gas flow at a temperature of 250 °C, 30 psi nebulizer gas flow, unit resolution (0.7 Da full width at half maximum in the first quadrupole (Q1) and the third quadrupole (Q3), and 200 V delta EMV (+). Loading Capacity Determination   Loading capacity for individual lectin pull-down was determined by injecting varying amounts of LeMBA pull-down and monitoring peptide responses using MRM-MS assay. Each LeMBA pull-down sample was resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid. 10 μl of this reconstituted sample was mixed with 6 μl SIS peptide mixture containing 150 femtomole of ISQAVHAAHAEINEAG R  and VASMASE K  each, 300 femtomole of VTSIQDWVQ K , and 30 femtomole of AVEVLP K . Out of the total 16 μl mixture, the optimized loading for AAL, JAC, NPL and PSA lectin was 13 μl, EPHA lectin was 11.5 μl and WGA lectin was 12.5 μl. Linearity and Reproducibility of MRM-MS   Linearity of the MRM-MS method was determined by injecting varying concentrations of aforementioned four SIS peptides spiked-into combined LeMBA pull-down sample of multiple lectins. The amount of SIS peptide spiked-in for each of four peptides was adjusted in such a manner that the response from the 1X labeled peptide mix fell within a 5-fold range of the cognate natural peptide. The concentration of spiked-in SIS peptide varied from 0.008× to 25× covering 3125-fold linear range where 1× concentration indicates mixture of 150 femtomole of ISQAVHAAHAEINEAG R  and VASMASE K  each, 300 femtomole of VTSIQDWVQ K , and 30 femtomole of AVEVLP K . All dilutions were run in triplicate on each day for three consecutive days ( n  = 9). The ratio of SIS peptide response/natural peptide response was plotted.   Reproducibility of MRM-MS assay was determined by injecting combined LeMBA pull-down sample from the 6 lectins in quadruplicate on each day for four consecutive days ( n  = 16). This experiment also determined the stability of the sample resuspended in 0.1% formic acid under the storage condition in the auto sampler. It was anticipated that once samples were resuspended in 96 well plates, they would be run within 3 days. Hence reproducibility was checked for four consecutive days after reconstituting samples. Percent coefficient of variation (% CV) between runs was calculated using peptide responses normalized with respect to ovalbumin peptide. Screening Samples for LeMBA-MRM-MS Qualification   Lectin-beads sufficient for biomarker qualification experiments were made in a single batch to minimize experimental variation. Serum samples were randomized for LeMBA-MRM-MS experiments. % CV of the entire LeMBA-MRM-MS screen was calculated based on response of heavy labeled SIS peptides and internal standard natural chicken ovalbumin peptides. All three SIS peptides, except methionine containing heavy labeled peptides, showed a % CV of less than 20% whereas % CV for normalized intensity of natural internal standard ovalbumin peptide was around or below 20% ( supplemental Table S8 ), suggesting robustness ( 43 ) of the LeMBA pull-down and mass spectrometric measurement. Interestingly, normalized intensity of natural methionine containing peptide VASMASEK showed less variation as compared with nonnormalized intensity, suggesting SIS peptide VASMASE K  containing methionine was able to correct for batch effects in methionine oxidation. One hundred femtomole of synthetic peptides mixture (G2455–85001, Agilent technologies) containing seven different human serum albumin peptides was run regularly to check linearity and reproducibility of the mass spectrometer results. When necessary, the mass spectrometer was tuned and calibrated. Data Processing   Raw data from MRM-MS experiment was processed using Skyline. All peaks were manually checked for correct integration, and peak area for each peptide (sum of all transitions) was exported for further analysis. For linearity experiments, the ratio of SIS:Natural peptide was calculated and plotted against SIS peptide spiked-in concentration. Median normalization was performed for each lectin data set separately ( supplemental Fig. S1 A ). Natural ovalbumin peptide peak intensity was first normalized with respective SIS labeled ovalbumin peptides. Next, using normalized intensity of natural ovalbumin peptide, the intensity of all other peptides was normalized. Methionine and nonmethionine containing peptides were dealt with separately during normalization steps, to account for batch effects in methionine oxidation. For reproducibility experiments, the normalized response with respect to ovalbumin peptide was calculated for each run, and the % CV of 16 injections of the same sample run over a period of 4 days calculated. Detailed statistical analysis was performed using normalized peptide intensity in the computing environment R.  supplemental Table S7  contains normalized intensity of LeMBA-MRM-MS data. Biomarker Qualification at Protein Level Using LeMBA-western Immunoblotting   The top two candidates AAL-HP and AAL-GSN, identified using sPLS-DA/stability analysis and the on/off change function of GlycoSelector, respectively, were verified using LeMBA-western immunoblotting in two sets of patient cohorts, firstly using serum samples from the same patients used for the discovery phase, and secondly using an independent set of 60 serum samples used for qualification. After AAL lectin pull-down, beads were directly boiled in 2× Laemmli sample buffer to elute captured glycoproteins. The denatured samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore) using wet transfer. To compare results across membranes, an AAL pull-down sample from one healthy volunteer serum (unrelated to samples used in screen) was loaded in equal amounts on all gels. Membranes were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in Tris-buffered saline-0.1% Tween-20 (TBST) for 1 h, and then carefully cut into two halves. The upper part of the membrane was incubated overnight with anti-gelsolin antibody (Epitomics #EP1940Y; 1: 3000 dilution in 5% BSA/TBST), whereas the lower portion was incubated with anti-haptoglobin antibody (Gen Way Biotech #GWB-16A7EA; 1: 1000 dilution in 5% BSA/TBST) at 4 °C overnight. This was followed by three TBST washes and incubation with 1: 3000 dilution of HRP-labeled anti-rabbit secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature (Invitrogen #A10547). The blots were developed using SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescence (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA), and captured on film (Fuji film, Tokyo, Japan; Developer and fixer solutions were from Kodak, Rochester, NY). Densitometric analysis was performed using ImageJ (NIH) ( 44 ). Raw densitometric values were normalized using the internal control sample loaded onto each gel. Analysis for Confounders   To check the impact of confounding covariates (reflux frequency, body mass index (BMI), smoking, and alcohol consumption) on biomarker candidates, an additional 19 population control (electoral roll) serum samples were measured using LeMBA-MRM-MS, to achieve sufficient number of disease-free samples for statistical analysis. Healthy and population control sample groups were merged and categorized according to reflux frequency, BMI, cumulative smoking history and alcohol consumption. Kruskal-Wallis test was applied to all the qualified candidates for each confounding factor. Candidates that showed  p  < 0.05 for BMI, reflux, cumulative smoking history or alcohol consumption were considered as false positives and removed prior to multivariate analysis. Functional Annotation Analysis   A list of candidates that differentiated EAC from BE was determined based on univariate Kruskal-Wallis test ( p  < 0.05) or multivariate analysis using sPLS-DA (stability > 70%) ( supplemental Table S10 ). The combined list of differential proteins was used in order to assess gene ontology differences between sample groups. We used the plasma proteome gene list ( 45 ), converted to DAVID IDs as a background in order to test for ontology differences by over-representation analysis using the DAVID ( http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/ ) website ( 46 ,  47 ) with default feature and algorithm settings. Ontology categories with adjusted FDR  p  values < 0.05 were recorded. Although we report individual ontologies, we applied the built-in functional annotation clustering function to help select representative ontologies for each main cluster (cluster scores over 3). RESULTS       Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Biomarker Discovery   An overview of the integrated glycoprotein biomarker discovery and qualification pipeline is shown in  Fig. 1 . The discovery phase used age-matched serum samples from 9 healthy, 10 BE, and 10 EAC male patients ( Table I ). BE and EAC patient groups had a significantly higher proportions of patients with hiatus hernia compared with healthy controls, as has previously been reported ( 48 ). We identified a total of 195 unique proteins from the MS/MS data ( supplemental Table S2 ). There was no difference between total number of proteins identified between healthy, BE and EAC patient groups ( Supplemental fig. S3 ). The discovery LeMBA-MS/MS data were uploaded to GlycoSelector for data housing and statistical analysis. The sPLS-DA sample representation, including the top 100 candidates (lectin–protein pairs) in the model, showed clear separation of the samples according to their phenotype (