>Materials and Methods   All chemicals for sample analyses (from the pre-analytical step to the data acquisition stage) were of pure-grade quality and obtained from various international suppliers. Briefly, the organic solvents used, methanol and acetonitrile, were LC-MS grade quality (Romil, SPS, Cambridge, United Kingdom). Water was purified by a Milli-Q Gradient A10 system (Siemens, Fahrenburg, Germany). Leucine enkephalin and formic acid were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany. Four bacterial isolates selected for this study belong to the  Bacillus  genus, the species included  B. licheniformis  M017,  B. licheniformis  1001,  B. amyloliquefaciens , and  B. laterosporus  strains. The microbial consortium is a commercial product—Bacstim ®  100, containing equal volumes of the above-mentioned  Bacillus  strains (Omnia Group Ltd., South Africa). The biostimulant activity of this microbial consortium, Bacstim ®  100, has been tested on maize plants under greenhouse conditions, where enhanced plant growth and drought tolerance was demonstrated ( Nephali et al., 2021 ;  Othibeng et al., 2022 ).   Bacterial Culturing, Harvesting, and Metabolite Extraction   To monitor the growth rates of bacteria, 100 μL of bacterial stocks (isolates— B. licheniformis  M017,  B. licheniformis  1001,  B. amyloliquefaciens , and  B. laterosporus  and the consortium, respectively) were inoculated into 20 mL Lysogeny broth (LB) media under sterile conditions and incubated at 28°C in a shaker at 140 rpm for 36 h. The OD 600  readings of the bacterial cultures were taken every 3 h to determine the bacterial growth curves ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). From the growth curves, 4-time points were selected for harvesting and metabolite extraction: 3 h (lag phase), 7.5 h (exponential phase), 24 and 31.5 h (stationary phase) ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). This growth curve was then used for bacterial cell harvesting. Following the conditions mentioned above, culturing flasks were prepared in triplicates for  Bacillus  isolates and consortium. At the selected time points (i.e., the determined growth phases), the cells were harvested by centrifuging the cultures at 5,000 rpm at 28°C for 15 min. Thereafter, the supernatants were decanted into new 50 mL falcon tubes and the wet weight of pellets was measured. Pellets were stored at −80°C until the metabolite extraction. The intracellular metabolites were extracted by adding 100% LC-MS grade methanol to the pellet (15 mg: 320 μL). The mixture was then vortexed, followed by sonication with a probe sonicator at 55% for 1 min. The homogenous mixtures were centrifuged at 3,700 rpm for 30 min at 28°C. The supernatants (intracellular metabolites samples) were filtered into pre-labeled HPLC glass vials fitted with 500 μL inserts (Shimadzu, South Africa) using 0.22 μm nylon filters and 1 mL syringes. Sample Analysis—Data Acquisition   Intracellular extracts were analyzed on an Acquity UHPLC system hyphenated with SYNAPT G1 high definition quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (HD-Q-TOF-MS) equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source (Waters Corporations, Milford, United States). Chromatographic separation was performed on an analytical C18 column HSS T3 (150 mm × 2.1 mm, 1.7 μm) with an injection volume of 3 μL. A binary solvent system was used as mobile phase, solvent (A) consisting of ultra-clear milli-Q water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid; solvent (B) consisting of 100% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The gradient elution was carried out at a constant flow rate of 0.4 mL min –1 , using the following conditions: initial conditions of 99% (solvent A) and 1% (solvent B) for 1 min. Solvent B was then gradually increased to 99% from 1–24 min and held constant for 3 min. From 27 to 28 min, solvent B was increased to 100% and held constant until 30 min (end of run). For mass spectrometry analyses, ionization was carried out in ESI positive mode with a 50–1,200 Da, and 0.2 s scan range and scan time, respectively. Other MS parameters were set as follows: source temperature of 120°C, desolvation temperature of 450°C, 2.5 kV capillary voltage, with 17 and 4 V sampling and extraction cone voltages, respectively, at a desolvation gas flow rate of 550 L/h. Both full-scan (unfragemented) and fragmentation MS analyses were carried out. A data independent acquisition (DIA) method, MS E , was applied (with collision energy ramping from 10 to 40 eV) to obtained fragmentation spectral data. Molecular Networking in the Global Natural Product Social Platform   The acquired (ESI positive) mass spectral data files (.raw Waters) were converted to Mass Spectrometry-Data Independent AnaLysis (MS-DIAL) compatible formats using the Reifys Abf (analysis base file) converter software. 1  The ABF files were then uploaded onto the MS-DIAL platform for data-processing and mass spectral deconvolution of data-independent acquisition (DIA). The data processing parameters used in MS-DIAL were as follows: mass accuracy (MS1 and MS2 tolerance) was set at 0.05 Da, the minimum peak height was set at 10 amplitude, mass slice width set at 0.1 Da for peak detection, a sigma window value set at 0.5 and retention time tolerance set at 0.2 min. The acquired peak spots (features) after processing were 543, 567, 603, 3,899, and 2,983 for consortium,  B. licheniformis  1001,  B. licheniformis  M017,  B. laterosporus , and  B. amyloliquefaciens , respectively. Post-data-processing, the Global Natural Product Social (GNPS) export files, i.e., GNPS MGF file and GNPS Sample Table (feature quantification table) were uploaded into the GNPS environment 2   via  the WinSCP server for molecular networking.   Feature-based molecular networks (FBMN) were generated using the respective workflow in the GNPS ecosystem. The set parameters used for generating different FBMN were precursor ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for  B. laterosporus  and  B. amyloliquefaciens B. licheniformis  M017,  B. licheniformis  1001, and consortium. The cosine score was set to be above 0.6 and a minimum of 4 matched fragment ions. The resultant molecular networks were then enhanced with the MolNetEnhancer ( Ernst et al., 2019 ) to improve the chemical structural annotations by incorporating  in silico  tools such as substructure recognition topic modeling (MS2LDA, MS2 latent Dirichlet allocation ( Van Der Hooft et al., 2016 ) with MotifDB ( Rogers et al., 2019 ) for annotated substructure patterns), DEREPLICATOR ( Mohimani et al., 2018 ) and network annotation propagation (NAP) ( da Silva et al., 2018 ). All the GNPS job links are provided in  Supplementary Material . The networks were visualized using the Cytoscape network visualization tool/software (version 3.8.2) ( Shannon et al., 2003 ;  Smoot et al., 2011 ). Metabolite Annotation   Metabolite annotation was performed using semi-/automated and manual approaches. Automated metabolite annotation was carried out by searching the MS-DIAL metabolomics MSP spectral kits (All public MS/MS libraries) 3  using MS-DIAL software. Further automated metabolite annotation was performed by searching against GNPS libraries  via  FBMN, DEREPLICATOR, and NAP which searched mass spectral and structural databases such as GNPS, HMDB, SUPNAT, CHEBI, and DRUGBANK. NAP jobs were run using the fusion scores and consensus score based on the first 10 candidates. MS2LDA interface in GNPS was used to explore and annotate substructures. Annotated MotifSets from MotifDB, such as MassBank, GNPS,  Euphorbia ,  Streptomyces  and  Salinisporus , and  Photorhabdus  and  Xenorhabdus , were included in the substructure discovery. The advanced MS2LDA parameters were set at default settings, overlap score threshold of 0.3, probability score of 0.1 and TopX of 5. Further details including which MotifDB annotated MotifSets were used for positive ionisation mode and the number of free motifs used can be found in the GNPS job links provided in the  Supplementary Material .   To validate and improve the semi-/automated annotations, manual spectral annotation was performed using a multistep workflow consisting of (i) the calculation of molecular formula (MF) of a selected  m/z , rt feature using Masslynx software (ii) searching of the MF candidates against databases and bioinformatics tools such Chemspider 4  and KEGG, 5  (iii) structural confirmation through careful inspection of fragmentation patterns by examining the MS 1  and MS E  spectra of the selected metabolite candidate and (iv) comparative assessment against annotation information of metabolites reported in the literature. Metabolites were annotated to levels 2 and 3 as classified by the Metabolomics Standard Initiative (MSI; ( Sumner et al., 2007 ). All validated metabolites are listed in  Supplementary Tables 1 ,  2 . Results and Discussion   Differentiation and Metabolome Annotation of  Bacillus  Strains   Decoding and knowing metabolite structures are pivotal to unraveling and understanding the functions of metabolites in (biological) systems ( Beniddir et al., 2021 ). This study employed mass spectrometry, an indispensable MS fragmentation approach that results in MS/MS spectra, which could be regarded as metabolite structural fingerprints ( Beniddir et al., 2021 ). The spectral data collected from all the selected time points (3, 7.5, 24, and 31.5 h growth incubation,  Supplementary Figure 1 ) of  Bacillus  isolates and consortium were used to generate feature-based molecular networks (FBMNs)—the sizes of the resulting FBMNs varied across the different strains and consortium ( Supplementary Figure 2 ). The most extensive network belonged to  B. laterosporus  (3898 spectral nodes, 496 spectral families,  Supplementary Figure 2 ), followed by  B. amyloliquefaciens  (2,985 spectral nodes, 405 spectral families,  Supplementary Figure 2 ),  B. licheniformis  M017 (602 spectral nodes, 55 spectral families,  Supplementary Figure 2 ),  B. licheniformis  1001 (566 spectral nodes, 48 spectral families,  Supplementary Figure 2 ), and consortium (542 spectral nodes, 53 spectral families,  Supplementary Figure 2 ). FBMN captured the structural diversity (represented as arranged mass spectra) existing within the chemical space of the four  Bacillus  isolates and the consortium ( Supplementary Figure 2 ). The varying network sizes of the four  Bacillus  isolates and the consortium are suspected to be due to sample complexity and/or analytical variations.   The computed FBMNs also revealed putative annotations through an automated library spectral matching against the GNPS public spectral libraries, which found a match for 54 out of 3,898 spectral nodes of  B. laterosporus , 127 out of 2,985 spectral nodes of  B. amyloliquefaciens , 40 out of 602 spectral nodes of  B. licheniformis  M017, 26 out of 566 spectral nodes of  B. licheniformis  1001, and 22 out of 542 spectral nodes of consortium ( Supplementary Figure 2 ; GNPS job links provided in  Supplementary Material ). These library matches were scrutinized and the validated metabolite classes included amino acids and peptides, lipids, organic acids, nucleotides, vitamins and sugar ( Supplementary Table 1 ). Although still very useful, FBMN in combination with spectral library matching enabled the annotation of only a small fraction of microbial MS/MS spectra, thus highlighting one of the major limitations in untargeted metabolomics. Furthermore, this demonstrates that current spectral libraries are still limited; and despite the development of computational tools, the vast majority of chemical signatures remain uncharacterized, and not all experimental spectra have a direct, exact match to the existing spectra libraries. However, even without fully identical spectral matches in the current libraries, the exploration of scaffolds or substructures (as inferred from the fragmentome) can still provide structural information of metabolites in a sample ( Beniddir et al., 2021 ).   Thus, to further explore the chemical space of the  Bacillus  (isolates and consortium),  in silico  annotation tools such as substructure recognition topic modeling (MS2LDA, MS2 Latent Dirichlet Allocation), and the NAP were performed for all spectral datasets from all four bacterial strains and a consortium, respectively. To illustrate the contribution of these tools to the microbial metabolite annotation and identification at a scaffold diversity level, the outputs obtained from  B. laterosporus  dataset are reported herein ( Figure 1  and  Supplementary Figure 3 ). MS2LDA is a machine learning method that performs an unsupervised decomposition of fragment spectra, revealing patterns of co-occurring fragments and neutral losses (termed “Mass2Motifs,” or shortly “m2m”) from multiple MS/MS spectra to extract information on substructural diversity within each class of metabolites ( Van Der Hooft et al., 2016 ;  Rogers et al., 2019 ). Five hundred and forty-one (541) Mass2Motif entries (chemical substructures) were learned and extracted from the  B. laterosporus  dataset with MS2LDA in GNPS—of which 168 were annotated and visualized  via   ms2lda.org  ( Wandy et al., 2018 ) into CytoScape ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). Infographics shown in  Figure 1  highlight some MotifDB-annotated motifs that were found in our LC-MS/MS data: m2m_42, related to adenine, m2m_4, related to proline, mb motif 4, related to loss of methyl group and m2m_33, which is indicative of guanine ( Figure 1A ), m2m_59, which is indicative of phenylalanine ( Figure 1B ) and m2m_3 and m2m_218 which are indicative of leucine ( Figure 1C ). The identification of motif m2m_3 helped with the annotation of the previously unidentified (unmatched  via  FBMN) features such as  m/z  279,  m/z  366 and  m/z  577, which are within the molecular family cluster of leucine-related compounds ( Figure 1C ),  m/z  279 was annotated as leucyl-phenylalanine ( Figure 1C ),  m/z  366 as leucyl-phenylalanyl-serine and  m/z  577 as glycine-glycine-serine-aspartic acid-leucine-glutamic acid, using the knowledge of m2m_3 from the MS2LDA. These annotations are recorded in  Supplementary Table 1 .   FIGURE 1.     Open in a new tab   MS2LDA-driven metabolite annotation. Subnetworks extracted from an MS2LDA-enhanced molecular network of positive electrospray ionization (ESI + ) MS/MS spectra obtained from  B. laterosporus  methanolic extracts ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). Colored nodes represent the recognized substructures related to Mass2Motifs (m2m),  (A)  m2m_33: related to guanine, m2m_42: related to adenine, m2m_4: related to proline and mb motif4: loss of methyl group,  (B)  m2m_59: related to phenylalanine,  (C)  m2m_3 and m2m_218 related to leucine. The mass spectral network views were obtained  via  the MolNetEnhancer workflow. The NAP tool exploits the network topology to rearrange candidate structure lists based on neighboring matches within molecular families ( Ernst et al., 2019 ). To obtain candidate structures, NAP uses  in silico  fragmentation performed with MetFrag, which searches for metabolites in structure databases such as GNPS, DNP (Dictionary of Natural Products), ChEBI (Chemical Entities of Biological Interest) and SUPER NATURAL II ( Ernst et al., 2019 ). Then, NAP uses two scoring methods to re-rank the candidates: (i) fusion scoring—utilization of MetFrag  in silico  prediction with the MetFusion when there is a spectral library match within a molecular family of the molecular network and (ii) consensus scoring—which exploits the structural similarity from  in silico  candidates across the spectral nodes of a molecular family. Thus, NAP is also useful when there are no or very few spectral library matches, allowing the propagation of annotations even without the spectral matches to reference MS/MS data. In this study, we employed NAP onto the FBMN of  B.laterosporus  to search against the above-mentioned structure databases—using both the scoring methods. After manual validation using the fragmentation patterns and molecular formula prediction in MarkerLynx and literature, we found that NAP was able to come up with reliable annotations for nine (9) molecular entities (out of 1,258 features), i.e., metabolites such as tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, L-prolyl-L-isoleucine and guanosine,2’-deoxy ( Supplementary Table 2 ).   The FBMN workflow was further integrated with  in silico  annotation tools such as MS2LDA, NAP, and DEREPLICATOR, generating enhanced (MolNetEnhancer) molecular networks. The latter reveals molecular families, subfamilies, and subtle structural differences between family members ( Ernst et al., 2019 ), thus allowing increased confidence in the class annotation and level of biochemical interpretation. MolNetEnhancer networks provided more comprehensive chemical insights into each  Bacillus  strain’s measured metabolomes and the consortium, respectively ( Figure 2  and  Supplementary Figures 4 ,  5 ).   FIGURE 2.     Open in a new tab   Representative MolNetEnhancer mass spectral feature-based network of consortium showing the chemical superclasses (written in colors corresponding to the nodes) and classes (written in black) that were putatively annotated based GNPS library matches and enhanced with substructure annotations (MS2LDA), network annotation propagation (NAP), and DEREPLICATOR outputs. The MolNetEnhancer networks of  Bacillus  isolates are shown in  Supplementary Figures 4 ,  5 . To explore the chemical diversity of the  Bacillus  metabolome, we looked at the class ontology level, which revealed various metabolite classes to be present, as shown in  Figure 2 . For example, when looking at lipid and lipid-like molecules, metabolite classes such as lipopeptides, peptidomimetrics, prenol lipids, sphingolipids, glycerolipids, etc. were shown in the consortium ( Figure 2 ). However, we note that some of these metabolite classes are hardly recorded before in  Bacillus  species. For instance, there are limited studies reporting on sphingolipids in  Bacillus  species. Currently, there is only one existing study reporting the presence of sphingolipids (sphinganine and phytosphingosine) in  Bacillus  spp.—sphinganine and phytosphingosine were identified using Accurate-Mass Q-TOF LC-MS, the detected masses and retrieved chemical formulae were further compared with the standard compounds in the Metlin database ( Gao et al., 2016 ). The latter reported that  B. cereus  exhibited high nematicidal activity against  Meloidogyne incognita  by producing sphingosine ( Gao et al., 2016 ). Moreover, the sphingolipid metabolism pathway in  B. subtilis  exists in KEGG database 6 ; however, these pathways lack the identification of enzymes that are directly responsible for the synthesis of sphingolipids in  B. subtilis . Nonetheless, such findings suggest the possibility of sphingolipids being synthesized by  Bacillus  species. As is true for all  in silico  approaches, further confirmatory studies are required to validate the existence of metabolite superclasses and classes annotated by the MolNetEnhancer strategy ( Figure 2  and  Supplementary Figures 4 ,  5 ). Thus, our findings provide, for the first time, a global metabolic landscape that describes the chemotypes of agriculturally important  Bacillus  strains. Furthermore, evaluating the chemical space of different  Bacillus  strains, i.e., their metabolic potentials in regards to the biosynthesis of certain metabolites (e.g., lipopeptides and sphingosines) can innovatively contribute toward the design of a novel combination of  Bacillus  strains for a biostimulant consortium formulation. For instance, with the primer knowledge generated from our study regarding the possibility of the biosynthesis of sphingolipids in  Bacillus  species, more studies will build on such insights to further establish mechanistically the sphingolipids biosynthesis pathways in  Bacillus  spp. Such actionable knowledge is a necessary step toward the design of novel specific biostimulant formulations containing the sphingolipids-producing  Bacillus , which would exhibit maximum nematocidal activity. Lipid and Lipid-Like Molecules—Lipopeptides: A Bioactive Molecular Family of Interest in  Bacillus- Plant Interaction   As revealed by the generated MolNetEnhancer networks of the  Bacillus  isolates and the consortium ( Figure 2  and  Supplementary Figures 4 ,  5 ), the lipid and lipid-like molecules were the most predominant superclass (e.g., 25 out of 53 spectral families in the consortium ( Figure 2 ). Within this superclass, the lipopeptide class can be found ( Figure 2 )—these latter are cyclic compounds known to be present in  Bacillus  strains, including members of the surfactin, lichenysin, iturin, and fengycin families ( Bernat et al., 2016 ). Interestingly, we observed several lipopeptide molecular families with differential abundance between the various strains and consortium. The surfactin family cluster was more apparent in the consortium ( Figure 3 ) whereas, the lichenysin family cluster was more apparent in the  B. licheniformis  strains ( Figure 3 ). The consortium revealed three surfactins with mass-to-charge ratio ( m/z ) 1008.7 [M + H] + ,  m/z  1044.7 [M + Na] +  and  m/z  1058.7 [M + Na] + , which were manually annotated [based on fragmentation fingerprints and available literature ( Nguyen et al., 2013 ), see methodology] as surfactin A, surfactin B, and surfactin C, respectively ( Figure 3 ). The  B. licheniformis  1001 network revealed three (3) lichenysins, with  m/z  1007.7 [M + H] + ,  m/z  1021.7 [M + H] +  and  m/z  1057.7 [M + Na] + , which were manually annotated (based on fragmentation fingerprints and available literature, see methodology) as lichenysin 2, lichenysin 3, and lichenysin 4, respectively ( Figure 3 ). The  B. licheniformis  M017 network showed lichenysin 4 only ( Figure 3 ). Surfactins and lichenysins were not detected at all in  B. laterosporus  strain ( Figure 4 ).   FIGURE 3.     Open in a new tab   Lipopeptide clusters extracted from the networks of isolates and the consortium (full networks in  Supplementary Figure 2 ). Different node colors represent different strains, orange (consortium), pink ( B. amyloliquefaciens ), green ( B. licheniformis  1001), and purple ( B. licheniformis  M017). Feng, fengycin. FIGURE 4.     Open in a new tab   Full MS scans of  m/z