>MATERIALS AND METHODS   Construction of Hydrogen Rearrangement Statistics.   To obtain the statistics of hydrogen rearrangements, MS/MS records of MassBank were filtered by their peak  m/z  values. Only those peaks whose  m/z  values were within 10 mDa of their theoretical mass and whose intensity exceeded 10% of their base peaks were used. The curation detail was described in  Supporting Information ,  SI Manuscript . The assignment of fragment ions was performed in a combinatorial fashion for each molecular structure as follows: (1) up to two bonds were considered broken for a tree-like structure, and up to four bonds were considered when two rings were dissociated (one ring fission was treated as breaking two bonds); (2) hydrogen rearrangement at each bond cleavage was considered within ±2 hydrogens; (3) fragment ions were assigned for observed masses in the following order to specify the most appropriate one from the candidates that match the  m/z  value within the mass tolerance:      Fragments from the first cleavage that follow the even-electron rule.   Fragments from the first cleavage that differ up to two hydrogens from a neutralized substructure.   Fragments from the second cleavage that follow the even-electron rule.   Fragments from the second cleavage whose precursors are also assigned in higher  m/z  area.   Fragments of minimum mass errors.   Strategy for the Assignment of In Silico Fragment Ion by HR Rules.   Computational MS/MS annotation was performed by the HR rules and not by the even-electron rule, as follows:      Fragments from the first cleavage that follow the HR rules (regular HR behaviors).   Fragments from the first cleavage that differ up to two hydrogens (irregular HR behaviors).   Fragments from the second cleavage that follow the HR rules.   Fragments from the second cleavage whose precursors are also assigned in higher  m/z  area.   Fragments of minimum mass errors.   MOPAC Program for Verifying Stable Fragments.   The MOPAC2012 program with PM7 parametrization was manually applied for each ionic structure to check its stability. The program computes the heat of formation from four parameters: the electronic energy, the nuclear−nuclear repulsion energy, the energy to strip off all valence electrons, and the total heat of atomization of all atoms. The latter two parameters were set empirically for each element using the default parameter set. Ionic substructures in the MOL format are available on request from the authors. MS-FINDER: Computational Generation of Molecular Formulas.   Formula candidates were computationally generated from the precursor  m/z  and the adduct type for a user-defined mass tolerance. The current program accepts a total of 11 elements including C, H, N, O, P, S, F, Cl, Br, I, and Si, although Si is not mentioned in this paper. The valence state and elemental ratio reduce the number of formula candidates. 28  The valence check was based on two equations using the total number of atoms (TA), the total number of atoms having odd valences (OV), and the sum of valences (SV) as follows: (1) OV or SV is even; (2) SV is greater than or equal to 2× (TA − 1). The valence of hetero atoms, that is, N, O, P, and S, were calculated as 3, 2, 5, and 6, respectively. The elemental ratio, such as the hydrogen/carbon balance, was based on our statistics which come from available metabolome databases ( Supporting Information ,  Tables S3  and  S7 ). MS-FINDER: Ranking of Formula Candidates.   The ranking of formulas was based on the total sum of five diagnostic scores on mass error, isotopic ratio, formula assignment to product ions, neutral loss searching, and existence in metabolome databases. Each score was standardized from zero (no similarity) to one (complete match), and the total formula score F ranges from 0 to 5. Each diagnostic score is calculated as follows.   The score of mass error was based on the Gaussian function as in the previous report. 4       mass error score = exp [ − 0.5 ( mass exp − mass theor δ ) 2 ]   (1)     The background hypothesis of the above equation is that the difference between experimental and theoretical values follows the Gaussian distribution. (The tolerance value, i.e., the standard deviation is user-defined.)   The similarity of isotopic ratio was calculated for 1 (M + 1) and 2 Da (M + 2) shifts from the monoisotopic ion (M). The isotopic abundance was theoretically calculated by the nominal binning. The experimental ions of M + 1 were summed within (precursor  m/z  + 0.997 −  δ , precursor  m/z  + 1.006 +  δ ) so that all isotopic ions derived from C, H, N, O, P, S, F, Cl, Br, I, and Si were covered. The ions of M + 2 were also summed within (precursor  m/z  + 1.994 −  δ , precursor  m/z  + 2.013 +  δ ). (The tolerance value is user-defined.) After the isotopic abundances were normalized by the monoisotopic ion, the similarity was calculated as follows.      istopic ratio score = exp [ − 0.5 ( M + 1 exp − M + 1 theor δ ) 2 ] + exp [ − 0.5 ( M + 2 exp − M + 2 theor δ ) 2 ] 2   (2)     The terms of M + 1 exp  and M + 2 exp  show the experimental ion abundances of M + 1 and M + 2, respectively. The terms of M + 1 theor  and M + 2 theor  show the theoretical abundances of M + 1 and M + 2, respectively. (The standard deviation is user-defined.)   The score for formula assignment was the rate of product ion assignment. After assigning elemental formulas for all product ions, the isotopic ions were excluded since the reliability of their isotopic ratio depended on the precursor isolation settings. The deisotoping of product ions was conducted with the following criteria: (1) isotope peak must be smaller than 1.5-fold of the theoretical isotopic abundance given that the elements of the precursor ion were carbon only, and (2) the  m/z  of isotopes is found within the user-defined mass tolerance.   For neutral losses, mass differences between all pairs of product ions were checked, and only the formulas in our neutral loss database (total 135 neutral losses from MS2Analyzer 29 ) were used as neutral losses. The assigned percentage of neutral losses for all differences was utilized as the evaluation score.   The score of database existence was discrete. If the formula was included in any of the metabolome databases that we curated ( Supporting Information ,  Table S3 ), 0.5 was used as the evaluation score, otherwise 0. To this value, the number of databases that include the formula, standardized by 0.5, was added. MS-FINDER: Searching of Structure Candidates.   The structural isomers for a given formula wer e retrieved from the internal database curated from total 14 metabolome databases ( Supporting Information ,  Table S4 ). If no entry was found, the program provides two options: searching the metabolic in silico network expansion database MINE 23  or/and using the PubChem PUG REST service to obtain structure data (the download limit can be specified). Structures were merged according to the first 14 characters of their InChIKeys to remove the stereo information. The structure with the largest number of synonyms, obtained by PubChem Identifier Exchange Service, was chosen as a representative structure. MS-FINDER: Ranking of Structure Candidates.   Structures were ranked by the scores on the basis of mass accuracy, bond dissociation energies (BDE), penalty of fragmentation linkage, and penalty of HR rules. First, the in silico MS/MS annotation is executed by the method of  Strategy for the Assignment of In Silico Fragment Ion by HR Rules section . Unresolved mass peaks by the HR rules were penalized by the score,  P h  (0.2 by default). Mass error penalty,  M , was calculated by the Gaussian function as described in the section of formula ranking. The penalty of BDE was calculated by the following equation,      B = 1 − B f B m   (3)      where  B m  is the maximum BDE in all possible in silico fragmentation of the structure and  B f  is the BDE value necessary to produce the fragment. BDE values for different bonding patterns were taken from the internal BDE dictionary. The penalty score of fragmentation linkage  P t  (0.5 by default) was introduced to prioritize precursor−product pairs that were both monitored in experimental MS/MS spectra. 25   The score for each fragment ion was calculated as follows.     S f = M × B × P t × P h   (4)     The penalties of  P t  and  P h  in this study were set to 0.5 and 0.2, respectively. Then, the sum of all scores for assigned fragments are divided by the number of MS/MS peaks:  ( 1 / n ) ∑ f = 1 n S f , where  n  stands for the number of MS/MS peaks. Cumulative fragmentation scores were normalized to 4, and a metabolome database presence score of up to 1 was added to form the overall structure weighting score S, ranging from 0 to 5. The database score was 0 if absent from the in-house metabolome databases and 0.5 + 0.5 × (the number of databases that contains the first layer of InChIKey)/(total number of databases) otherwise. The final ranking of molecular structures was determined by the sum of the formula score  F  (as explained in the previous section) and the structure score  S .      T = a × F + b × S   (5)      The coefficients  a  and  b  were set to 1 in this study. Supplementary Material   support.info #5     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__5.pdf  (179.4KB, pdf)    support.info #4     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__4.pdf  (599.9KB, pdf)    support.info #2     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__2.pdf  (1.4MB, pdf)    support.info #1     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__1.pdf  (620KB, pdf)    support.info #3     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__3.pdf  (713.2KB, pdf)    support.info #7     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__7.pdf  (175.5KB, pdf)    support.info #6     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__6.pdf  (133.7KB, pdf)    support.info#8     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info_8.xlsx  (8MB, xlsx)    support.info#13     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info_13.xlsx  (29KB, xlsx)    support.info#12     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info_12.xlsx  (5.4MB, xlsx)    support.info#9     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info_9.xlsx  (33.4MB, xlsx)    support.info #10     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__10.xlsx  (722.2KB, xlsx)    support.info #11     NIHMS869808-supplement-support_info__11.xlsx  (1.6MB, xlsx)    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   This work was supported by the NSF-JST Strategic Interna tional Collaborative Research Program (SICORP) for JP-US Metabolomics; the Database Integration Coordination Program of the National Bioscience Database Center; Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas 15H05897; the JST-Core Research for Evolutionary Science and Technology (JST-CREST); and partially the Japan Advanced Plant Science Network. H.T. was supported by a grant-in-aid for scientific research (C) 15K01812. O.F. and T.K. were supported by the corresponding Grant NSF MCB 1139644. T.K. was also supported by NSF CBET 1438211, NIH 2R01HL091357-05, and AHA 15SDG25760020. The blood plasma cohort data were acquired as a part of the P20 Program NIH HL113452 Grant supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH). Mass spectral recording and annotations were supported by Grant NIH DK097154 to O.F. We appreciate the support of the QTOFMS instrument through NIH Grant S10-RR031630. A special thanks to Prof. Shigehiko Kanaya (NAIST) and Plant Metabolic Network (PMN) for giving us the KNApSAcK MOL files and PlantCyc database, respectively. Finally, we appreciate Dr. Hisao Tanaka for active discussions about hydrogen rearrangements. Footnotes       Supporting Information   The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the  ACS Publications website  at DOI:  10.1021/acs.analchem.6b00770 .   SI Manuscript: (1) The curation detail of MassBank, GNPS, and human plasma data sets, (2) the curation detail of metabolome databases, and (3) the detail of program comparisons ( PDF ).   Figure S1: Putative fragmentation schemes described in  Figure 2  ( PDF ).   Figure S2: Peak annotation result of guanosine 5’-diphosphoglucose MS/MS spectra and the putative fragmentation scheme ( PDF ).   Figure S3: Result of formula prediction with the result of database score only.  x  and  y  axes give the ranking and the accumulated percentages of total records. (a) Result of the MassBank validation set when the target elements are set to CHNOPS. (b) Result of the MassBank validation set when the target elements are set to CHNOPS plus halogen atoms. (c) Result of the human plasma data set obtained from HILIC-ESI(+)-QTOF MS/MS with 5 mDa mass tolerance. In each panel, “random” indicates a random picking from the candidates as the baseline performance. In addition, “database count” indicates the result derived from the database score only, which is also used as the baseline performance to explain the effect of meta-data scores ( PDF ).   Figure S4: Result of structure selection for PubChem repository. Structure data for all formula candidates were retrieved from PubChem repository. The data set was the same as that of  Figure 8 . (a) Result of the MassBank data when the target elements were set to CHNOPS. (b) Result of the MassBank data when the target elements were set to CHNOPS and halogens. (c) Result of the human plasma data obtained from HILIC-ESI(+)-QTOFMS with 5 mDa mass tolerance ( PDF ).   Table S1: Statistics of hydrogen rearrangements for CNOPS elements in GNPS ( PDF ).   Table S2: Peak annotation details of  Figure 2  ( PDF ).   Table S3: Internal formula database from 14 metabolome databases ( XLSX ).   Table S4: Internal structure database from 14 metabolome databases ( XLSX ).   Table S5: 5063 MassBank records used in this study ( XLSX ).   Table S6: 936 human plasma records used in this study ( XLSX ).   Table S7: Formula element statistics of formula databases to determine the practical elemental ratios ( XLSX ).   Table S8: In-house HILIC-ESI(+)-QTOFMS library of human blood plasma metabolites ( XLSX ).     The authors declare no competing financial interest.   REFERENCES       (1). Fiehn O Plant Mol. Biol 2002, 48, 155–171.  [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     (2). Patti GJ; Yanes O; Siuzdak G Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 2012, 13, 263–269.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     (3). Benton HP; Ivanisevic J; Mahieu NG; Kurczy ME; Johnson CH; Franco L; Rinehart D; Valentine E; Gowda H; Ubhi BK; et al.  Anal. Chem 2015, 87, 884–891.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     (4). Tsugawa H; Cajka T; Kind T; Ma Y; Higgins B; Ikeda K; Kanazawa M; VanderGheynst J; Fiehn O; Arita M Nat. Methods 2015, 12, 523–526.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     (5). Horai H; Arita M; Kanaya S; Nihei Y; Ikeda T; Suwa K; Ojima Y; Tanaka K; Tanaka S; Aoshima K