>Methods   Metadata as input   MS2DeepScore 1.0 uses mass fragments as an input to predict chemical similarity between mass spectra 6 . In the current work, MS2DeepScore 2.0 allows for the use of additional metadata of the fragmentation spectra. This is implemented in a flexible way, which allows adding any type of metadata as an input into the model. Numerical data, e.g., precursor  m/z  or collision energy, is transformed to values closer to 1, to have input in a similar order of magnitudes, to optimize training. Textual inputs, like ionization mode or instrument type, are one-hot encoded. For the dual-ionization mode model used in the main text, precursor  m/z  and ionization mode were used as additional metadata input. As a part of the current study, other experiments were also run with instrument type and/or adduct type as additional input(s). An overview of the selected model architecture can be found in Fig.  1 . Tanimoto score   As a metric for chemical similarity between two molecules, the Tanimoto score between molecular fingerprints was used 36 . An RDKit 37  daylight-like binary fingerprint (4096 bits) was generated for each unique 2D structure. This Tanimoto score was used for training and benchmarking and will be referred to as the Tanimoto score. The original MS2DeepScore model used 2048 bits. Supplementary Fig.  7  shows the difference in MSE when training and benchmarking a model on 2048 or 4096 fingerprint bits. Since the resulting accuracy is different for different fingerprint lengths, this makes direct comparisons of benchmarking results in the figures of the original MS2DeepScore paper impossible. Spectrum pair selection for training   One of the key challenges in training a model to predict Tanimoto scores is the highly non-uniform distribution of these scores across possible molecule pairs. Low Tanimoto scores are several orders of magnitude more frequent than high Tanimoto scores. In our previous work 6 , this imbalance was partly mitigated by a data generator that selected a molecule pair belonging to a random Tanimoto score bin for each pair selection step. However, molecules in the used dataset often lacked partners in the high Tanimoto score ranges. As a result, even though the former data generator substantially reduced the bias, there was still a considerable shift towards lower Tanimoto scores. In addition, the selection of the second molecule in a pair was not equally distributed, leading to high variability in sampling frequency per unique molecule.   To address these issues, we developed a pair sampling algorithm optimized for balanced sampling across Tanimoto score bins and near uniform sampling frequencies for each unique molecule. During training, the pair sampling algorithm loops over selected molecule pairs and randomly selects two corresponding spectra per molecule pair, because often multiple spectra are available for a single molecule. In this work, two molecules were considered the same if the first 14 characters of their InChIKeys were equal, thereby ignoring stereochemistry. The pair sampling algorithm loops multiple times over the selected set of molecule pairs, but the corresponding spectra are randomly resampled every loop.   Before training the model, a balanced set of molecule pairs was selected. The molecule pair sampling happened per Tanimoto bin, but during the sampling, the molecule sampling count was tracked. The sampling algorithm started by selecting the least frequently sampled molecule with pairs available in the Tanimoto bin. From the candidate pairs for this molecule, the second molecule with the lowest sampling count was chosen. Resampling of molecule pairs was allowed, enabling both a close-to-equal sampling frequency across unique molecules and a balanced distribution over Tanimoto bins. To minimize resampling, the algorithm prioritized the least sampled available pairs before selecting the least sampled second molecule. This sampling algorithm significantly improved sampling balance. However, some molecules were still sampled up to six times more than others. To further reduce this imbalance, a maximum sampling count per molecule was introduced, limiting sampling frequency disparities to less than 15%. Details of the experiments conducted to optimize the sampling algorithm are provided in Supplementary Note  2 . Binning spectra   Before training, the fragments were binned to make them suitable as input for the neural network. Binning happened by making bins of 0.1 Da between 10 ≤  m/z  < 1000 Da, resulting in 9900 bins. In the former MS2DeepScore work, bins were only included if they had at least one fragment in the training data. Instead, MS2DeepScore 2.0 uses all bins, even if none of the training spectra have a fragment in this bin. This reduces code complexity and reduces the risk of accidental mismatch between the binning method and model versions. Intensity values were transformed by square-root to reduce the impact of high intensity signals. Architecture improvements   MS2DeepScore 1.0 is implemented in Tensorflow 6 , 38 . Here, the entire MS2DeepScore 2 model was reimplemented using Pytorch 25 . This improved compatibility with GPUs and Apple M1 chips, but also overall code readability. A pipeline is now available that performs all steps necessary for training MS2DeepScore models. The wrapper function only requires a file with annotated mass spectra and the settings for model training. First, mass spectra are separated on ionization modes and split in test, train, and validation sets. After that, the model is trained, and benchmarking figures are created. Model settings   The original MS2DeepScore paper used two layers of 500 nodes with an embedding size of 200. Given the expanded training library and the dual-ionization mode training, it was expected that a different model architecture could result in better performance. Hyperparameter optimization was performed to determine an optimal configuration, as detailed in Supplementary Note  1 . The final architecture consisted of a single layer with 10,000 nodes and an embedding size of 500, which was used for all models presented in the main text.   Compared to the former MS2DeepScore models, several other adjustments were made. The final layer activation function was changed from ReLU to Tanh 39 , dropout and batch normalization were removed, and the settings for data augmentation were changed: augment removal max was changed from 0.3 to 0.2, augment intensity was changed from 0.4 to 0.2, and augment noise intensity was changed from 0.01 to 0.02. The exact settings were added as a JSON file to the Zenodo entry, see “Data availability” section. Input data filtering and splitting   For training the models, we combined multiple public libraries: the GNPS library 4 , the MassBank EU library, the MassBank of North America (MoNA) library 40 , and MS 2  spectra of MS n Lib created by Brungs et al. 41 . After combining these libraries, they were first cleaned using the matchms library cleaning pipeline 42 , 43 . The settings for cleaning can be found in Supplementary Settings  1 . Experiments that assessed the model performance for different minimum signal numbers and intensity thresholds can be found in Supplementary Fig.  1 . After cleaning, the library consisted of 36,638 unique molecules and 519,580 spectra in positive ionization mode and 18,480 unique molecules and 145,594 spectra in negative ionization mode. A molecule was considered unique if the first block of its InChiKey identifier (14 letters) was equal, thereby ignoring stereochemistry.   The cleaned spectrum library was split by ionization mode and divided into training, validation, and test sets. We selected 1/20th of unique molecules for both the validation and test sets, all corresponding spectra to these molecules were removed from the training set. For the positive and negative mode set, the selection of InChIKeys to use for the validation and test sets was different, since we might otherwise have introduced a bias in the validation set for spectra that were available in both ionization modes. The dual-ionization mode library was trained by combining the positive ionization mode training spectra and the negative ionization mode training spectra. The validation spectra were used for all experiments for the optimization of our model, like changing the filtering of input spectra, or adjustments to the model size. The test set was not used during any experimentation or hyperparameter optimization and was only used for benchmarking of the final model. Embedding and score uncertainty estimation   The prediction quality of the MS2DeepScore model is sensitive to the quality of input spectra and the similarity to the training data. To detect spectra that are hard to predict for MS2DeepScore, we designed a pipeline using a convolutional neural network that predicts the quality of a spectrum embedding. The “Embedding Evaluator” model is implemented using an Inception Time architecture 44  using Pytorch 25 . The embedding evaluator is trained to predict the mean squared error (MSE). For each training spectrum, the MSE is calculated by randomly sampling 999 other training spectra and calculating the MSE over these 999 pair predictions. The model is trained to predict the MSE from the embedding of the spectrum. The conceptual idea here is that the Embedding Evaluator will learn to identify embeddings for low-quality or out-of-distribution input data. In later applications, the predicted embedding qualities can be used for uncertainty estimation. Benchmarking   The mean squared error (MSE) was used as a loss function, measuring the difference between the predicted and actual Tanimoto score. During training, a sampling algorithm ensured equal numbers of spectrum pairs in each Tanimoto bin and a balanced representation of molecule pairs. However, due to the lower number of available validation spectra, it is not suitable to use the same sampling algorithm for the validation spectra, since this would significantly reduce the number of pairs available for benchmarking. To obtain a representative MSE for the validation and test set, the average loss per molecule pair was calculated by averaging the losses of all available spectrum pairs for each molecule pair. The used mass spectral library often contains multiple mass spectra for one molecule, in some cases up to several hundred spectra for the same molecule. By taking the average loss per molecule pair, we ensured that the model's performance is not judged mostly on the performance of a few molecules with a high number of mass spectra. The average MSE per molecule pair was then used to calculate the average MSE per Tanimoto bin. Ten equally spaced Tanimoto bins between 0 and 1 were used. The final loss used was the average MSE over these 10 bins. In addition to this benchmarking we analysed the performance of MS2Deepscore for different adducts and different compound classes, these results can be found in Supplementary Figs.  23  and  24 . These analyses give insights into the general patterns of the strengths and weaknesses of the MS2DeepScore model. “Lipids and lipid-like molecules” and “nucleosides, nucleotides and analogs” had slightly better performance, while organic oxygen compounds had a higher error. Supplementary Fig.  24  shows that for the adducts [M+Na]+ and [M + K]+, the accuracy was lower than average. A comparison of MS2Deepscore to the modified cosine score is available in Supplementary Note  5 . Case studies   To illustrate the possibilities MS2DeepScore 2.0 introduces, we show the capabilities of the model to create dual-ion-mode molecular networks and UMAP 22  embedding representations using three case studies with experimental datasets. The case studies are performed on human urine samples, human blood plasma samples and a  Rumex sanguineus  (plant) sample.   Urine case study   The MS 2  spectra used for this case study were acquired for urine fractions generated at the National Phenome Centre by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RP-LC) as detailed in the  supplementary methods  and described by Albreht et al. 45 . Urine fractions were treated like intact urine samples and profiled using the previously reported UHPLC-RP-LC assay designed for small molecule separation on a Waters 2.1 × 150 mm (1.8 μm) HSS T3 column maintained at 45 °C 46 , 47 . LC-MS system was a Waters Acquity UPLC instrument coupled to Xevo G2-S TOF mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., Manchester, UK) via a Z-spray electrospray ionization (ESI) source. All LC conditions, the gradient elution program and the mass spectrometry parameters are detailed in the  Supplementary Methods . Human blood plasma case study   Lipid species present in the NIST Frozen Human Plasma standard reference material—SRM1950, were chromatographically separated using a UHPLC-RP-LC assay tailored for complex lipid separation on a 2.1 × 100 mm BEH C8 column (maintained at 55 °C) developed by Lewis, et al. 47 . For this analysis, LC-MS system was an ACQUITY Premier UPLC (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) with a Premier solvent manager and column/heater modules and a H-Class sample manager and organizer coupled to a Xevo G3 QTof mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., Manchester, UK). All details of sample preparation, LC conditions, gradient elution program and mass spectrometry parameters are reported in the  supplementary methods . Rumex sanguineus case study   Metabolomics data from  Rumex sanguineus  were obtained from the study performed by Ramundi et al. 48 . Briefly, 25 mg of tissue was homogenized and extracted with a water/methanol/methyl tert-butyl ether mixture. Mass spectrometry data were acquired using an Agilent 1290 UHPLC coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive Focus Orbitrap equipped with a heated electrospray ionization interface. Analysis was performed in both positive and negative ionization modes, with data-dependent acquisition (DDA). 24 samples were analysed, comprising 4 biological replicates extracted in duplicates (8 roots, 8 stems, and 8 leaves). The mass spectra from all samples were combined into a single file and processed with MS2DeepScore to create a cross-ionization mode UMAP visualization. Ramundi et al. annotated 347 metabolites, including both level 1 and level 2 annotations. These annotations are used to validate cross-ionization mode capabilities of MS2DeepScore, the molecular structures for some of the annotated spectra are visualized in Fig.  3b . Data preprocessing urine and blood plasma case studies   MassLynx software (Waters, Manchester, U.K.) was used for data acquisition and visual inspection. The raw data files were converted from the Waters.RAW format to.mzML format using the msconvert tool from the ProteoWizard toolkit 49 . DDA files converted to.mzML format were peak picked and converted to.mgf format using MSDIAL ver.4.9.221218 Windowsx6434 using the following parameters for peak detection: min peak height = 1000 amplitude, mass slice width = 0.05 Da; MS2Dec: sigma window value  =  0.5, MS 2  abundance cutoff = 200 amplitude; Alignment: RT tolerance = 0.05 min, MS 1  tolerance = 0.01 Da.   The peak-picked spectra were further processed by matchms 42 , 43 . For the urine case study, only MS 2  spectra were kept with more than four fragments, for the  Rumex sanguineus  and blood plasma case studies, no minimum number of peaks was set. The exact processing settings and logging can be found in the Jupyter notebooks on GitHub. The visualized structures in Fig.  2  and the annotated nodes in Supplementary Fig.  25  have all been manually annotated. In addition, putative annotations and analog predictions were done using MS2Query 3 . Annotations with a prediction higher than 0.7 are included in the interactive UMAP embedding visualization. Molecular networking   In Fig.  3a  and Supplementary Fig.  25 , dual-ionization mode molecular networks are visualized with MS2DeepScore similarity edges and MS 2  as nodes. GraphML files were created using matchms. The graphml files were used for visualizing the molecular networks in Cytoscape 50 . The minimum MS2DeepScore cut-off used is 0.85, “top-n” is set to 20, meaning that only the top 20 highest-scoring similarity scores per spectrum were considered for creating edges. The link method used was mutual, which means only edges were added if the edge is in the top list of both nodes. For each node, the highest 10 scores that have a mutual link in the top 20 of bode nodes were used for creating an edge. These settings could still result in more than 10 edges connecting to a single node if an edge from another node was in the top 10 highest similarity scores with a mutual connection.   To highlight the capabilities of MS2DeepScore across ionization modes, we selected a few clusters that included both positive and negative ionization mode spectra. The clusters were manually annotated by experts. Supplementary Table  1  provides the method of annotation and confidence levels for all structures visualized in Fig.  3a . Embedding UMAP visualization   MS2DeepScore generates spectral embeddings as intermediate output. These embeddings can be used directly to visualize spectra in 2D space by using dimensionality reduction methods. Here, we used UMAP to reduce the 500 embedding dimensions to two dimensions. The number of neighbors was set to 50; this setting influences how local or global the 2D representation is. The resulting UMAP representation can be found in Fig.  3b  and is also available as an interactive plot, see “Data availability” section. The interactive plot can be colored based on ionization mode or ClassyFire 51  compound class annotation of MS2Query 3  analog predictions. Integration into mzmine   MS2DeepScore is available through PyPI as a pip installable Python package. Even though little programming knowledge is required to apply MS2DeepScore models and clear tutorials are available, this was still a significant hurdle for scientists without programming experience. To offer an easy local deployment, MS2DeepScore has been integrated into mzmine 21 , a modular MS data processing software. Now, mzmine enables Feature-based Molecular Networking (FBMN 52 ) and Ion identity Molecular Networking (IIMN 20 ) using MS2DeepScore in an interactive network visualizer coupled with compound annotation and statistics dashboards. This allows users to create molecular networks and explore the chemical space within the mzmine graphical user interface, without requiring command line or scripting. A tutorial for using MS2DeepScore within mzmine can be found here:  https://mzmine.github.io/mzmine_documentation/module_docs/group_spectral_net/molecular_networking.html#algorithm-MS2DeepScore .   Integration of MS2DeepScore in mzmine required converting the MS2DeepScore model to the Torch script format, which is supported by the Deep Java Library (DJL). The package  https://github.com/niekdejonge/MS2DeepScore_java_conversion  contains scripts for converting existing MS2DeepScore models. The latest Torch script version of the MS2DeepScore model is available at 10.5281/zenodo.12628368 and can be automatically downloaded from within mzmine’s molecular networking module. MS2DeepScore is available in mzmine starting from mzmine version 4.3.0. Reporting summary   Further information on research design is available in the  Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary  linked to this article. Supplementary information     Supplementary Information  (3.4MB, pdf)      Reporting Summary  (2.3MB, pdf)      Transparent Peer Review file  (3.8MB, pdf)      Supplementary Settings 1  (1.9KB, txt)    Source data     Source data  (11.8KB, xlsx)    Acknowledgements   The authors thank Corinna Brungs for sharing prereleases of the latest MS n Lib library 41  and for her assistance with filtering out MS n  and merged MS 2  spectra. The authors thank Tomáš Pluskal for hosting N.d.J. during a lab visit, which enabled the collaboration that led to the integration of MS2DeepScore in mzmine. N.d.J. thanks Dick de Ridder for helpful discussions and feedback on the results of MS2DeepScore 2.0. N.d.J. thanks the research lab of Soha Hassoun for valuable feedback on the first preprint. E.C. was supported by the Medical Research Council and National Institute for Health Research [grant number MC_PC_12025] and the Medical Research Council UK Consortium for MetAbolic Phenotyping (MAP UK) [grant number MR/S010483/1]. Infrastructure support for E.C. was provided by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Imperial Biomedical Research Centre (BRC). F.H. was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) [project 528775510]. Author contributions   N.d.J. came up with the concept for cross-ionization mode similarity scores and wrote the first version of the manuscript. F.H. came up with the concept for the EmbeddingEvaluator. N.d.J., J.J.J.v.d.H., and F.H. designed the research and revised the manuscript. N.d.J., D.J., L.J.T., and F.H. contributed to the code. N.d.J. and F.H. designed and evaluated the code for the current version. N.d.J. and R.S. implemented MS2DeepScore in mzmine. E.C. annotated the case study data. Data from the urine samples used in this study were originally generated by the National Phenome Centre, Imperial College London. All authors contributed to the data analysis and interpretation. J.J.J.v.d.H. and F.H. supervised this work. Peer review   Peer review information   Nature Communications  thanks Ewy Mathé and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review file is available. Data availability   The dual-ionization mode MS2DeepScore model and embedding evaluator model used in this study can be downloaded from Zenodo, 10.5281/zenodo.14290920. The training, validation, and test spectra can be downloaded from 10.5281/zenodo.13934470. All case study data can be found on 10.5281/zenodo.16311735. This includes an interactive version of the full UMAP plot as an HTML file and the required files to create the molecular networks in Cytoscape. Source data are provided with this paper. The raw data and notebooks required to reproduce each figure are available in the Source Data file.  Source data  are provided with this paper. Code availability   MS2DeepScore is available as PyPI package and therefore pip installable. The version used for this manuscript is version 2.5.3. All code is available on  https://github.com/matchms/MS2DeepScore  and version 2.5.3 can be downloaded from 10.5281/zenodo.18255344. The readme contains explanations on how to install and use MS2DeepScore and includes instructions for training an MS2DeepScore model on in-house data. The notebooks used for creating the benchmarking figures can be found in the folder