>Methods   Workflow MS2Query   MS2Query builds on the improvements of two machine learning-based methods, developed to predict chemical similarity from MS 2  mass spectral pairs; Spec2Vec 30  and MS2Deepscore 32 . These methods perform especially well at predicting chemical similarity for molecules that are similar but are chemically not exact matches. This makes Spec2Vec and MS2Deepscore very suitable for an analogue search.   The workflow for running MS2Query first uses MS2Deepscore to calculate spectral similarity scores between all library spectra and a query spectrum. The top 2000 spectra with the highest MS2Deepscore are selected. To optimally rank these 2000 spectra, MS2Query calculates 5 features which are combined by a random forest model. The prediction of the random forest model is used to rank the 2000 preselected library spectra (See Fig.  1 ). As input for the random forest model, MS2Query uses 5 different features, calculated between the query spectrum and each of the 2000 preselected library spectra. The features are 1. Spec2Vec similarity, 2. query precursor m/z, 3. precursor m/z difference, 4. an average MS2Deepscore over 10 chemically similar library molecules, and 5. the average Tanimoto score for these 10 chemically most similar library molecules.   The Average MS2Deepscore of multiple library molecules (feature 4), builds on the following principle. For two library molecules that are chemically very similar, it is expected that if one of these library molecules is a good analogue to the query spectra, the other is a good analogue as well. For this reason it is expected that for a good analogue the MS2Deepscore between such a chemically similar library molecule and the query spectrum is also high. This is captured in this feature by calculating the average MS2Deepscore between a query spectrum and all spectra of 10 chemical similar library molecules (Fig.  4 ). These 10 library molecules are selected based on the known chemical structures of the spectra in the library, by selecting the library structures with the highest Tanimoto score. For each of the 10 library molecules all corresponding library spectra are selected. As an input feature for the random forest model, the average over the MS2Deepscore for the 10 library structures is used (Feature 4). In addition, the average of the Tanimoto score between the starting library structure and the 10 library structures is used as an additional input feature (Feature 5). Multiple variations of the implementation of this feature were tested and the best performing implementation was selected. These other implementations used weighting based on the Tanimoto score, or weighting the MS2Deepscore for each spectrum equally instead of using the average MS2Deepscore per library structure. These other implementations and their performance are described in more detail in Supplementary Note  3 .   Fig. 4. Workflow for calculating two input features of the random forest model.     Open in a new tab   Feature 5 is the Average Tanimoto score for similar library molecules and feature 4 is the average MS2Deepscore over 10 chemically similar library molecules. Tanimoto scores as structural similarity label   First, an rdkit 35  daylight fingerprint (2,048 bits) is generated from the SMILES for each unique 2D structure in the library. Unique 2D-structures were selected by selecting the first 14-characters of the InChIKeys in the library. The SMILES were first sanitized by rdkit. If multiple spectra with the same InChIKey exist in the dataset, a spectrum with the most frequently occurring InChI was selected and was used for all spectra with the corresponding InChIKey. A Tanimoto score 34  was calculated between the molecular fingerprints for each pair of InChIKeys. The Tanimoto score is used as an indication for structural similarity of that pair. These Tanimoto scores are used as labels for training MS2Deepscore and MS2Query and for selecting chemically similar library molecules to calculate an average of the MS2Deepscore of multiple chemically similar library spectra. Data cleaning   For training and testing of MS2Query, we used data from GNPS. For the k-fold cross-validation the spectra were downloaded from ( https://gnps-external.ucsd.edu/gnpslibrary/ALL_GNPS_NO_PROPOGATED.mgf ) on the 1 st  of November 2022. For the case studies and the determining of the feature importance the GNPS dataset used was downloaded from GNPS ( https://gnps-external.ucsd.edu/gnpslibrary/ALL_GNPS.mgf ) on the 15 th  of November 2021, 20:00 CET. More details about the model used for benchmarking the case studies can be found in Supplementary Note  1 .   The dataset was first cleaned using matchms 33 . The metadata was cleaned to get a uniform format and to remove or correct misplaced metadata. The dataset is split into positive and negative mode spectra. The intensities of the mass fragmentation peaks are normalised. Peaks above 1000 Da were removed and peaks with an intensity of less than 0,1 % of the highest peak were removed. For spectra with more than 500 peaks, the peaks with the lowest intensities were removed. Spectra with less than 3 peaks were completely removed from the library. Some spectra in the GNPS library do not have an InChIKey stored. A method from matchms extras was used to add missing InChIKeys by searching the compound name and molecular formula on PubChem. The library spectra were split into annotated and unannotated spectra. A spectrum was considered fully annotated if it has a valid SMILES, InChiKey and Inchi. The unannotated spectra were used as additional training spectra for Spec2Vec, since Spec2Vec is unsupervised. The unannotated spectra were not used for training MS2Deepscore, MS2Query or for the test spectra. Training models for MS2Query   MS2Query uses MS2Deepscore and Spec2Vec models, for all benchmarking new models for MS2Deepscore and Spec2Vec were trained to ensure that none of the test spectra were used for training these models (Fig.  5 ). MS2Deepscore was trained on all fully annotated spectra from the GNPS library, using the same settings as used for the MS2Deepscore publication 32 . A Spec2Vec model is trained using all spectra from the GNPS library, both annotated and unannotated spectra. The model is trained in 30 epochs using binning on 2 decimals 30 .   Fig. 5. Workflow for MS2Query model training.     Open in a new tab   Workflow for training the MS2Deepscore model, the Spec2Vec model and the random forest model used by MS2Query. Rounded boxes indicate mass spectral handling steps, whereas squared boxes are indicating machine learning model training steps. The blue colour highlights preparation steps of the mass spectral data prior to model training, the yellow colour the Spec2Vec model, the red colour the MS2DeepScore model, and the green colour the MS2Query model. The random forest model used by MS2Query was trained on pairs of annotated spectra using five different features to predict the Tanimoto score between the two structures of each pair. To generate the training spectrum pairs all library spectra of 1/40 th  of unique InChIKeys and 1/40 th  of the remaining spectra were randomly selected from the library spectra. The spectrum pairs were generated by starting with one spectrum from this set and creating spectrum pairs with the 100 library spectra that have the highest scoring MS2Deepscore for this spectrum. More details about the motivation for selecting the top 100 highest scoring spectra for training can be found in Supplementary Note  5 .   The implementation of scikit-learn 37  was used for the random forest model. The mean squared error was used as a loss function. The number of estimators was set to 250 and the max depth to 5. The implementation of scikit-learn was used to calculate the feature importance of the 5 scores used. This method is based on an impurity-based feature importance, also known as the Gini importance 38 .   Beside these 5 features, multiple other features were tested as well, for instance the cosine and modified cosine score. These other features were not selected since these did not improve the performance of the model. Details about the other features tested can be found in Supplementary Note  3 . Benchmarking   MS2Query was designed to search for analogues and exact matches in one run, two different types of test sets were generated to test the performance on these two goals, an “analogue test set” and an “exact matches test set”. Benchmarking for the analogue test set was done using 20-fold cross-validation. Meaning that the training dataset was split into 20 test sets. The MS2Deepscore, Spec2Vec and Random Forest model were trained on the remaining 19 sets. The analogue test sets were generated by splitting the unique 2D structures in the library into 20 equal groups, for which all corresponding spectra were selected. Benchmarking for the exact matches test set was also done by creating 20 test sets. These test sets were generated by selecting all unique 2D structures in the library and randomly selecting one spectrum from these, leaving the rest in the library. The 20 sets differ in which spectrum was randomly selected from the unique 2D structures.   The performance of MS2Query was compared to the performance of the modified cosine score, the cosine score and MS2Deepscore. All four methods use a minimal threshold for the spectral similarity score to determine if a library spectrum is a good analogue or exact match. The threshold for each method was varied between 0 and 1, followed by calculating a performance metric and the recall for predictions falling in the selected threshold. The used performance metric for the “analogue test set” was the Tanimoto score between the predicted library molecule and the correct test molecule. The performance metric for the “exact matches test set” was the percentage of true matches, a prediction was considered a true match when it matches the 2D structure of the correct molecule.   In case of the analogue search using MS2Deepscore and modified cosine score, library spectra were first filtered on a maximum precursor m/z difference of 100 Da. To perform the benchmarking of the search for exact matches using MS2Deepscore and cosine score, only library spectra were considered within a mass tolerance of 0.25 Da. To calculate the cosine score, the cosine greedy implementation of matchms 33  was used with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Speed and memory optimization   MS2Query was optimised for speed and working memory efficiency. To make this possible, MS2Query aims to avoid repetitive, computational expensive operations. The biggest speed improvement was achieved by pre-calculating mass spectral embeddings for Spec2Vec and MS2Deepscore. MS2Deepscore and Spec2Vec both predict a chemical similarity score between two library spectra, by first calculating a multidimensional embedding followed by calculating the (mathematical) cosine similarity between these two embeddings. The library spectra are already known, therefore the embeddings for all library spectra are pre-calculated and stored. Therefore, only for the query spectra the embeddings have to be computed, instead of for all the library spectra.   In the first step of MS2Query, the top 2000 library spectra are selected that have the highest MS2Deepscore between the query spectrum and a library spectrum. To do this selection, the MS2Deepscores between a query spectrum and all MS2Deepscores are calculated. To avoid repetitive calculation of these scores, the calculated MS2Deepscores are reused to calculate the average of the MS2Deepscore of multiple chemically similar library molecules.   The precursor m/z is the only metadata entry that is required for MS2Query and which serves to calculate the mass differences. Other spectra metadata such as retention time, SMILES, or compound names can be returned for results found by MS2Query. To reduce the toll on working memory, this information is stored in a SQLite library. The precursor m/z is stored in a separate SQLite library column for efficient look-up speeds. To calculate the average MS2Deepscore of multiple chemically similar library molecules, the 10 most chemically similar library molecules based on the Tanimoto score are needed. This top 10 list of most related InChIKeys is pre-calculated for every unique InChIKey in the library and stored in the SQLite library.   MS2Query contains a workflow to automatically generate all needed files for an MS2Query library and a fully automatic workflow for training all the needed models on a new library. This makes it straightforward to run MS2Query or create models for different mass spectral libraries. Speed performance   The speed was tested on the 5987 test spectra in positive mode and compared to the positive mode GNPS library containing 302.514 spectra. The test was run on a laptop; the Lenovo Thinkbook 15-IIL. This laptop has an 11th generation Intel Core i5-1135G7 and 16GB installed RAM. Case studies   Four case studies were performed to confirm that MS2Query performs well on newly generated experimental data. Two blood plasma samples, a urine sample and a bacterial sample set were analysed. The raw data, intermediate files and raw results can be found on 10.5281/zenodo.6811540. Here below, the materials, the analytical methods used, and the analytical and data pre-processing and processing steps are described for all case studies. Case study 1: NIST Human blood plasma   The NIST 1950 Frozen Human Plasma standard reference material (SRM) was used. The sample was subjected to reversed-phase chromotographic (RPC) assay tailored for complex lipid separation developed by Lewis, et al. 39 , as further described below. Case study 2: blood plasma long-term reference   For this case study, a plasma Long-Term Reference (LTR) sample was used. This LTR is routinely integrated in profiling studies at the National Phenome Centre for study-independent monitoring of precision. To create the plasma LTR, 10 L of bulk plasma were purchased from Seralab, homogenized, and aliquoted for long-term storage at –80 °C. Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) was used in this case study for the analysis of polar metabolites in a sample of plasma LTR 39 , as further described below. Case study 3: urine long-term reference   For this case study, a pooled Long-Term Reference (LTR) urine sample, maintained by the National Phenome Centre and utilized as an independent sample reference throughout all molecular profiling studies, was used. The protocol followed to generate urine LTR sample is described in detail by Lewis et al. 40 . Briefly, this material was created by pooling together 78 urine voids collected from healthy volunteers in one day. LTR urine collection was carried out under REC Wales approval: 12/WA/0196. No screening criteria were used to assess the health status of the donors. All samples were combined in a 20 L vessel, homogenized and aliquoted into 15 mL polypropylene conical centrifuge tubes (Corning) for long-term storage at –80 °C. Samples were analyzed by reversed-phase chromatographic (RPC) assay tailored for small molecule metabolites 39 , as further described below. Pre-processing case study 1   To perform the lipidomic profiling, a combined refence standards mixture (referred to as LipidMix) is added to all samples during protein precipitation with isopropanol (IPA). The composition of the Lipid standard mixture is shown in Supplementary Table  5 . The stock solutions of the lipid standards are prepared in and further diluted in the mixture with IPA.   NIST 1950 human plasma sample was thawed at 4 °C for 2 h. Subsequently, a 50 µL aliquot was taken and prepared for lipid analysis by dilution with LC-MS grade water (1:1 v/v) and addition of four parts of isopropanol (IPA) containing a mixture of lipid reference standards 39  to one part of diluted sample for protein precipitation. Vial with the sample was mixed at 1400 rpm for 2 h at 4 °C and subsequently centrifuged for 10 mins at 3486 ×  g  at 4 °C to separate the homogenous supernatant from the precipitated protein. The clear supernatant was aspirated and dispensed into LC-MS vial, then additionally centrifuged for 5 mins at 3486 ×  g  and 4 °C prior analysis. Prepared sample was injected (1 µL) in the chromatographic system using full loop mode (5× overfill). Pre-processing case study 2   To perform the HILIC profiling, the method reference (MR) mixture of the reference standards is added to all pooled QC samples providing metabolite targets that represent the wider observable metabolome while facilitating a more real-time assessment of data quality. To allow assessment of sample preparation and injection precision as well as some limited assessment of matrix effect across individual study samples, internal standards (IS) are added to all pooled QC and study samples. When preparing samples for small molecule for HILIC profiling, MR and IS mixtures are prepared in aqueous solutions and added to the sample prior to further preparative steps. The composition of the HILIC MR and IS standard mixture is shown in Supplementary Note  9  (Supplementary Table  6 ).   Plasma LTR sample was prepared for the analysis by HILIC method in positive ionization mode. The sample was thawed at 4 °C for 2 h. Subsequently, a 50 µL aliquot of plasma LTR sample was diluted 1:1 with LC-MS grade water and a mixture of HILIC MR and IS as described in Supplementary Note  9  (Supplementary Table  6 ) with 10 µL each. Three parts of acetonitrile were then added to one part of diluted sample for protein precipitation. Vial with the sample was mixed at 1400 rpm for 2 h at 4 °C and subsequently centrifuged for 10 mins at 3486 ×  g  at 4 °C to separate the homogenous supernatant from the precipitated protein. The clear supernatant was aspirated and dispensed into LC-MS vial, then additionally centrifuged for 5 mins at 3486 ×  g  and 4 °C prior analysis. Prepared sample was injected (2 µL) in the chromatographic system using full loop mode (5× overfill). Pre-processing case study 3   Preparation and analysis of urine samples are described in detail by Lewis et al. 40 . In brief, an aliquot of 150 µL of urine LTR sample was mixed with RPC-specific MR solution in proportion LTR:MR 2:1 and further diluted with 75 µL of ultrapure water and 75 µL of RPC-specific internal standards (IS) solution shown in Supplementary Note  9  (Supplementary Table  7 ). The sample was mixed at 850 rpm for one minute at 4 °C and centrifuged for 10 mins at 3486 ×  g  at 4 °C. The supernatant was aspirated and dispensed into LC-MS vials for the analysis. Urine sample was injected (2 µL) in the chromatographic system using full loop mode (5× overfill). UHPLC-MS profiling analysis for case studies 1-3   All UHPLC-MS analyses were performed on Acquity UPLC instruments, coupled to Xevo G2-S TOF mass spectrometers (Waters Corp., Manchester, UK) via a Z-spray electrospray ionization (ESI) source.   To perform the lipid profiling, all solvents – water, acetonitrile (ACN), and IPA and mobile phase additives ammonium acetate and acetic acid were of LC-MS grade. Lipidomic profiling was conducted using a 2.1 × 100 mm BEH C8 column, thermostatted at 55 °C. Mobile phase A consisted of a 2:1:1 mixture of water:ACN:IPA with 5 mm ammonium acetate, 0.05% acetic acid, and 20 µM phosphoric acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 1:1 ACN:IPA with 5 mM ammonium acetate, 0.05% acetic acid. The initial conditions were 99:1 A:B at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. The gradient elution program is based on the protocols associated with Lewis et al 39 . and is shown in Supplementary Note  9  (Supplementary Table  8 ).   The HILIC chromatographic retention and separation of polar molecules was conducted using a 2.1 × 150 mm Acquity BEH HILIC column thermostatted at 40 °C. 20 mM ammonium formate in water with 0.1% formic acid was used as mobile phase A and ACN with 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase B. The initial conditions were 5:95 A:B at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. The gradient elution program is based on the protocols associated with Lewis et al 39 . and is shown in Supplementary Note  9  (Supplementary Table  9 ).   To perform the urine profiling, water and ACN supplemented with 0.1% formic acid of LC-MS grade were used as mobile phases A and B. A 2.1 × 150 mm HSS T3 column thermostatted at 45 °C was used with a mobile phase flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. The gradient elution program is based on the protocols associated with Lewis et al 39 . and is shown in Supplementary Table  10 .   The analysis of blood plasma and urine reference samples in presented case studies were performed in positive ionization mode. The mass spectrometry parameters were set as follows: capillary voltage 2 kV for lipid profiling and 1.5 kV for urine profiling, sample cone voltage 25 V for lipid profiling and 20 V for urine profiling, source temperature 120 °C, desolvation temperature 600 °C, desolvation gas flow 1000 L/h, and cone gas flow 150 L/h. Data were collected in centroid mode with a scan range of 50–2000  m/z  and 50–1200  m/z  for lipid and urine profiling, respectively, and a scan time of 0.1 s. For mass accuracy, LockSpray mass correction was performed using a 600 pg/μL leucine enkephalin solution ( m/z  556.2771 in ESI + ) in 1:1 water:ACN solution at a flow rate of 15 μL/min. Lockmass scans were collected every 60 s and averaged over 4 scans. The mass spectrometer was operating in Fast DDA mode. The intensity threshold of precursor ion was set to 100 K to trigger MS 2  fragmentation that was performed in centroid mode with a scan range of 50–2000 m/z and a scan time of 0.25 s. MS 2  was switched back to MS survey function after 2 s acquisition. Deisotoped peak selection option was enabled. The collision energy was set to the ramp of 15–30 eV and 30–60 eV for MS 2  acquisition of low and high mass ions, respectively. Ten iterative DDA acquisitions were performed using DDA auto-exclude program, which allows ions selected as precursors in previous injections are removed from the list in the following injections. Case study 4: anammox bacteria   For the fourth case study extracts of three strains of anammox bacteria were used.  Kuenenia stuttgartiensis  MBR1 was cultivated in a 12 liter single-cell membrane bioreactor (MBR) as previously described by Kartal et al. 41 . In brief, the growth medium consisted of (per liter): 1 g KHCO3, 0.025 g KH2PO4, 0.6 mM HCl, 45 mM NaNO2, 45 mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.15 g CaCl2⋅2H2O, 0.1 g MgSO4⋅7H2O and 0.00625 g FeSO4⋅7 H2O, and 1.25 ml trace elements consisting of (per liter) 0.24 g CoCl2⋅6 H2O, 0.25 g CuSO4⋅5 H2O, 0.014 g H3BO3, 0.99 g MnCl2⋅4 H2O, 0.22 g Na2MoO4⋅2 H2O, 0.05 g Na2WO4⋅2 H2O, 0.19 g NiCl2⋅6 H2O, 0.067 SeO2, 15 g Tritiplex III (EDTA), 0.43 g ZnSO4⋅7 H2O). In the reactor, the temperature was maintained at 33 °C with a heating jacket and the biomass was stirred at 200 r.p.m. with a six-bladed turbine stirrer. Excess biomass was removed at 1.1 L per day, resulting in a doubling time of 10 days.  Brocadia fulgida  was cultivated as previously described by Kartal et al 42 . with some adjustments: the working volume was 6 liter and the bacteria were kept in a single-cell membrane bioreactor. The growth medium consisted of (per liter): 1.25 g KHCO3, 0.1 g KH2PO4, 0.048 g MgSO4⋅7H2O, 0.0576 g CaCl2⋅2H2O, 0.00625 g FeSO4⋅7 H2O, 1.25 ml trace elements (as described above), 45 mM NaNO2, and 45 mM (NH4)2SO4. Temperature was regulated with a heating jacket and kept at 33 °C. The biomass was stirred at 200 r.p.m. with a six-bladed turbine stirrer. The reactor was originally inoculated with activated sludge from the secondary stage of the Dokhaven municipal wastewater treatment plant (Rotterdam, The Netherlands).  Scalindua  was cultivated in a 5.5 liter sequencing batch reactor at room temperature as described earlier by van de Vossenberg et al. 43 . Medium consisted of (per liter): 30 g red sea salt, 0.003125 g KHCO3, 0.025 mg FeSO4⋅7 H2O, 30 mM NaNO2, and 30 mM (NH4)2SO4. The biomass was stirred at 350 r.p.m. with a six-bladed turbine stirrer.  Scalindua  was originally enriched from the deepest part of the Gullmar Fjord (Alsbä