>Methods   Sample Preparation   A general metabolome extraction procedure was performed: 16  (i) 5 μL urine was extracted in 200 μL of chloroform/methanol/water (1:3:1) at 4 °C; (ii) then vortexed for 5 min at 4 °C; (iii) then centrifuged for 3 min (13 000 g ) at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant was stored at −80 °C until analysis. A pooled aliquot of the 22 selected urine samples was prepared prior to the LC–MS runs with DDA applying higher collision dissociation (HCD) as in ref ( 13 ). The same procedure was followed for the 19 beer samples, see also ref ( 10 ). Finally, to create fecal extracts, the stool samples were freeze-dried and 5 mg of lyophilized fecal material was extracted in 200 μL of chloroform/methanol/water (1:3:1) at 4 °C; followed by homogenization in a FastPrep-24 homogenizer for 60 s at stroke setting 5, after which the same procedure as for urine was followed. Analytical Platform   A Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, CA) was used. That system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a HESI II interface (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, U.K.). Thermo Xcalibur Tune software (version 2.5) was used for instrument control and data acquisition. LC Settings   The HILIC separation was performed with a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC column (150 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm) equipped with the corresponding precolumn (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). A linear biphasic LC gradient was conducted from 80% B to 20% B over 15 min, followed by a 2 min wash with 5% B, and 7 min re-equilibration with 80% B, where solvent B is acetonitrile and solvent A is 20 mM ammonium carbonate in water. The flow rate was 300 μL/min, column temperature was maintained at 25 °C, injection volume was 10 μL, and samples were maintained at 4 °C in the autosampler. 13 MS and MS/MS Settings   MS and MS/MS settings used to generate separate mode fragmentation files are fully described in refs ( 10  and  13 ). In short, for positive- and negative-ionization separate fragmentation modes, the duty cycles consisted of a full scan in positive-ionization mode, followed by a TopN data-dependent MS/MS (MS2) fragmentation event taking the 10 most abundant ion species not on the dynamic exclusion list. MS/MS fragmentation spectra were acquired using stepped higher collision dissociation combining 25.2, 60.0, and 94.8 normalized collision energies in one MS2 scan. In full-scan mode, the duty cycle consisted of two full-scan events alternating positive and negative ionization modes. Data Acquisition and Processing   Data Acquisition   Quality control procedures from Glasgow Polyomics were used. 16  Details can be found in the Supporting Information  section S3 . Data Processing: Feature Extraction   Data, in the form of .mzXML (full scan) and .mzML (fragmentation) files, are preprocessed using XCMS 17  and MzMatch 18  for peak detection and RMassBank 19  for detecting MS1–MS2 pairs, before matrix formation by aligning MS2 features across different spectra and samples. One benefit of working at the level of the structural families defined by MS2LDA is that the samples can be preprocessed separately and no retention time alignment is required. The resulting data set consists of a set of MS2 spectra for each sample, containing fragment and loss features (and their intensities) that have been matched across all samples (Supporting Information  section S3 ). MS2LDA+ Model   The MS2LDA+ model is an extension to standard LDA in which a single set of motifs (known as topics in standard LDA) is shared across multiple samples. For inference, we have developed a Variational Bayes 12  scheme in which each sample is modeled with standard MS2LDA except for the updates of the motifs which are pooled across the samples (Supporting Information  section S4 ). The output is a set of Mass2Motifs and assignments of Mass2Motifs to each MS1 peak in each sample. Essentially, all mass fragments and neutral losses are now linked across samples to assess their co-occurrence in the entire collection of fragmentation spectra while also storing feature matrices for each individual sample. The extension from MS2LDA to MS2LDA+ model is depicted in  Figure  1 .   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Extension from MS2LDA to MS2LDA+. In MS2LDA, a single sample (containing  M  molecules) is decomposed using  K  Mass2Motifs. In MS2LDA+,  F  samples (containing M1, M2, M3 molecules, etc.) are decomposed onto shared Mass2Motifs. Prevalence of the Mass2Motifs can then be compared across the samples. In this example, the red Mass2Motif is most prevalent in the second sample, and the green in the third. The MS2LDA pipeline was extended to MS2LDA+ to enable the analysis of multiple samples in one analysis by linking all fragments and losses and their co-occurrences across the entire corpus while storing sample-specific information ( Figure  1 ). In MS2LDA+, the sample-specific prevalence of the different Mass2Motifs for the  f th sample is captured by a parameter vector α f , that has one value per Mass2Motif (α k f ) (represented by the bar charts at the bottom of  Figure  1 ). The higher the value, the more prevalent that Mass2Motif is within the sample. Prevalence here can be interpreted as the proportion of all feature intensity (of the fragmented molecules) that is explained by this Mass2Motif. These α vectors provide a high-level view of the biochemical makeup of each sample in terms of the prevalence of the different, shared Mass2Motifs ( Figure  1 ).   Following MS2LDA, we used the Mass2Motif-molecule probabilities to define the links between the molecules. The probability can be interpreted as the proportion of a molecule’s spectrum that is explained by this Mass2Motif, and it is therefore affected by the number of peaks in the molecule’s spectrum. For example, two molecules that both include a complete Mass2Motif would have very different probabilities if one of them had many more other peaks. In a further development from the original MS2LDA, we have therefore implemented a second, complementary linking score: the  overlap score . The overlap score measures how much of the Mass2Motif is present in the spectrum rather than how much of the spectrum is explained by the Mass2Motif (Supporting Information  section S5 ). The higher that score, the more mass fragments and neutral losses from the Mass2Motif can be found in the fragmentation spectrum of the parent ion, increasing the confidence that the substructure is indeed present. An intrinsic model property is that all spectra must be assigned to at least one Mass2Motif. This enforces “alien” metabolites not sharing any substructures with other metabolites to be part of a structural family (with very high probabilities) despite sharing hardly any or no characteristic features. These outliers are now easily recognized by the combination of a high membership probability but very low overlap score. Data Analysis   Statistical Tools   PCA Analysis   PCA analysis was performed on the 41 × 500 matrix of α values to project it down into a 41 × 2 matrix for visualization. The values were normalized so that the total value within each sample was equal to 1. This allows the values to be interpreted as Mass2Motif probabilities within each sample. The standard approach of whitening the variables (motifs) prior to PCA was performed. PCA analysis was done in Python using the PCA method provided in the scikit-learn package. 20   Mass2Motif differential prevalence was determined by computing the z-score for each Mass2Motif between the two groups (difference of α means divided by the sum of the standard deviations). As for PCA, the α values within each sample were normalized to sum to 1. To compute similarity between Mass2Motifs, their α values (now the vector of values across samples for each Mass2Motif) were compared by computing their pairwise Pearson correlation values. Structural Characterization of Mass2Motifs   Mass2Motifs discovered in beer and urine were structurally characterized by comparison to earlier discovered Mass2Motifs 10  and characteristic fragments found by manual inspection of clusters in a Molecular Network, 13  through expert knowledge and matching of the Mass2Motif spectra to reference spectra in MzCloud ( www.mzcloud.org ). Data Availability   All data, processed data, and codes used for this paper will be available for download from the university repository ( http://researchdata.gla.ac.uk/402/ ). In addition, data is available through GNPS/MassIVE: MassIVE data set MSV000081118 contains the urine sample data, MSV000081119 the beer sample data, and MSV000081120 the stool (fecal) sample data. All codes can be found in GitHub ( https://github.com/sdrogers/lda ). Results   MS2LDA+ Exposes Biochemical Differences between Samples   To validate the extent to which MS2LDA+ generates biochemically relevant knowledge from untargeted metabolomics experiments and the extent to which α f  provides a biochemical  summary  of each sample, sets of 19 beer and 22 urine samples were combined in one analysis to discover 300 Mass2Motifs. Using biological samples from two distinct origins will highlight the high-level differences that MS2LDA+ can extract from large experiments. The prevalence of two discovered Mass2Motifs across all the 41 samples is displayed in  Figure  2 .  Figure  2 A–C displays the paracetamol mercapturate with  Figure  2 A displaying the fragmented ions that contain the paracetamol mercapturate Mass2Motif,  Figure  2 B displaying the α f  across all samples, and  Figure  2 C showing the number of metabolites that passed a threshold of 0.01 on their molecule-Mass2Motif probability. As can be seen, the trend of the two histograms is very similar. The Mass2Motif is clearly prevalent in 5 of the urine samples and present in a couple more and virtually absent in the beer samples (those that are grouped from beer are incidentally mass-matched metabolites sharing only one or two abundant mass fragments), as expected since it is a human drug related Mass2Motif. Inspection revealed that the characteristic fragmentation pattern of paracetamol mercapturate consisting of 5 recurring fragments is absent from those beer fragmentation spectra. Higher threshold values on document-Mass2Motif probabilities and overlap scores would reduce the number of such spurious hits. The acetyl loss Mass2Motif ( Figure  2 D–F) displays a completely different picture of a fairly constant number of metabolites that contain this Mass2Motif in both beer and urine samples with some of them present in both sample sets (see  Figure  2 D).   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   (A–C) Paracetamol mercapturate Mass2Motif in beer and urine samples with (A) metabolites displayed in  m / z  vs RT plot, (B) α f , and (C) degrees. Note that the model finds (almost) no molecules from beer (as expected) that contain the paracetamol mercapturate Mass2Motif; those that do spuriously match are doing so because one or two abundant fragments overlap but the characteristic paracetamol mercapturate pattern is clearly absent from those beer fragmentation spectra. (D–F) Acetyl loss Mass2Motif in beer and urine samples with (D) metabolites displayed in  m / z  vs RT plot, (E) α f , and (F) degrees. Note that we observe many molecules from beer, many from urine, and many that appear in both that contain the acetyl loss Mass2Motif. Substructure-Based Principal Component Analysis   To visualize the results at a higher level, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to project the 41 (total number of samples) α f  vectors from their original 300-dimensional space (one dimension per Mass2Motif) into two dimensions.  Figure  3  shows clear separation of the two sample groups with the Mass2Motif loadings indicated as gray lines, highlighting the ability of MS2LDA+ to characterize complex mixtures. We subsequently explored the Mass2Motifs with high loadings (those that contribute most to the separation of beer and urine samples) and found, among Mass2Motifs more prevalent in beer, choline, aminohexose, and hexose conjugation substructures (also highlighted in  Figure  3 ), and among those more prevalent in urine, creatinine, trimethylamine, and acylcarnitine substructures. The relevance of these metabolite groups to beer and urine highlights the interpretability of the MS2LDA+ analysis; we are able to rapidly observe biochemical differences between the sample groups without relying on the identification of individual molecules. In particular, beer derives partly from plant-based metabolomes rich in glycosylated products. During brewing, sugars are released that can react with other parts of the beer metabolite pool, resulting in many glycosylated products. Creatinine, a byproduct of muscle metabolism cleared from serum by the kidneys, is typically found in urine and not in beer, as expected.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Principal component analysis (PCA) of 19 beer and 22 urine samples. The largest variance (42.7%) is explained by the differences between the beer and urine groups. Motifs are indicated with lines and several structurally characterized Mass2Motifs are highlighted. Differential Prevalence of Mass2Motifs   To further explore the differences highlighted by MS2LDA+, we performed a differential prevalence analysis for each Mass2Motif between the two sample sets. The 20 Mass2Motifs showing the most consistent differential prevalence (based on a  t  test) for each sample were examined (box plots in  Figure  4 A,B). Of these, we found many Mass2Motifs to which we could assign a substructure or structural feature. Many Mass2Motifs prevalent in beer were based on sugars (hexoses) and typical plant-based structural motifs like cinnamic acid. Likewise, urine prevalent Mass2Motifs include those structurally characterized as proline betaine and trimethylamine substructures. It is also informative to examine the Mass2Motifs that were unchanged between the two sample groups. These included structural families related to the loss of CHOOH (indicative for a free carboxyl group, present in both amino acids and organic acids) and the nucleotide cytosine. Both urine and beer contain similar numbers of molecules related to those structural families. Indeed, both urine and beer contain amino acids and organic acids which both contribute to the carboxyl loss structural family. Note that within this analysis we are making use of information from spectra that would not be identified by classical existing methods. Alternatively, one could look at differences in prevalence of particular molecular families based on the families of identified metabolites. However, such an analysis risks heavy bias: analysis of spectral database contents reveal substantial overlap to a relatively small set of widely abundant metabolites. 21  Quantifying such bias would be near-impossible. MS2LDA+ sidesteps the problem by considering all spectra that contain a particular Mass2Motif.   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Boxplots of high variance alphas abundantly present in beer (A) and urine (B): the top 20 most differential Mass2Motifs are displayed and labeled with their structural characterizations. These results show that MS2LDA+ can highlight biochemically relevant differences between sample groups in complex metabolomics data. Moreover, we can rank the Mass2Motifs by their variance across the samples and extract the Mass2Motifs that display high variance among the samples. We hypothesize that, within urine samples, those Mass2Motifs that exhibit high variance are likely to represent exogenous metabolites including drugs and food-related metabolites (xenobiotics), while those displaying lower variance are more likely to represent endogenous metabolite families. In the following section we test this hypothesis. Mass2Motif Variance within Urines Exposes Xenobiotic-Derived Substructures   MS2LDA+ was used to discover 300 Mass2Motifs in the 22 urine samples and the α f  values were used to determine the variance for each Mass2Motif (note that to compute the variance we normalized each α f  so that they summed to one over the samples to remove the effect of globally high and low prevalence Mass2Motifs). The 30 most and least variable Mass2Motifs were extracted and, where possible, structurally characterized.  Table S6-1  in the Supporting Information, section S6, shows the 30 most variable Mass2Motifs, 23 of which were structurally characterized as containing a biochemically relevant substructure. Nearly all (22) of those substructures can be described as xenobiotic (drug, food-related, or otherwise not naturally occurring in humans). For example among the top 10 most variable Mass2Motifs, we found substructures related to paracetamol mercapturates (a group of metabolites derived from paracetamol, a pain killer (see also  Figure  2 A–C) for which the Mass2Motif mass fragments matched with the characteristic fragments previously determined from a Molecular Networking cluster, 13  amlodipine (an antihypertensive diuretic), and dimethylated pyrogallol (a marker of polyphenol intake 22 ). At the low variance end, 21 out of the 30 least variable Mass2Motifs were structurally characterized as containing a biochemically relevant substructure ( Table S6-2  in the Supporting Information, section S6). In the top 10, acetyl loss, cytosine related, and the loss of CHOOH were found, indicating that a constant number of metabolites contain those substructures across the 22 different urines. An additional 57 Mass2Motifs were structurally characterized with biochemically relevant substructures or with related ion products including isotope variants ( Table S6-3  in the Supporting Information, section S6). Lysine, carnitine (acylcarnitine), and methyladenine are among those motifs. A total of 101 Mass2Motifs could be structurally characterized, covering on average ∼1600 molecules in a urine sample which represents 86% of the total molecules for which MS/MS data were collected.   Mass2Motifs also show variation across the retention time axis of the mass/charge versus retention time plots ( Figure  5 ). Mass2Motifs like the loss of a pentose ( Figure  5 B) occur throughout the entire chromatographic window, whereas metabolites containing the sartan-based Mass2Motif elute in a narrow band ( Figure  5 D). This can further assist in the structural characterization of Mass2Motifs.   Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Retention time (RT) versus mass/charge ( m / z ) plots for fragmented MS1 ions containing Mass2Motifs annotated as (A) loss of glucuronide, (B) loss of pentose, (C) C10 or longer acylcarnitines, and (D) sartan related drug metabolites. A clear difference in occurrence throughout the chromatogram can be observed with pentose loss occurring throughout the complete RT window while the hydrophobic sartan related drugs are confined to a narrow RT band. Biochemically Related Substructures Cluster Based on Prevalence Across Samples   (Bio)chemically related substructures (i.e., those created by different pathways derived from the same core metabolite) would likely result in similar α f  profiles across the samples. The most variable Mass2Motif was related to paracetamol mercapturates, containing a variety of mercapturates. Pearson correlation between the α f  vectors for each sample was used to visualize the similarity between the Mass2Motifs profiles with edges between Mass2Motifs where their correlation exceeded a threshold (Supporting Information,  section S7 ). Many xenobiotic Mass2Motifs were found in isolation in the alpha correlation network, indicating their unique prevalence across the urine samples. Conversely, endogenous Mass2Motifs were more densely connected. Interestingly, however, the paracetamol mercapturates Mass2Motif was clustered not only to a Mass2Motif characterized as a paracetamol substructure but also to a Mass2Motif that was subsequently characterized as a group of fragments belonging to methoxyparacetamol. Hence similarities between profiles for individual Mass2Motifs across the samples allow us to prioritize Mass2Motifs to characterize and can assist in the structural elucidation process.   Both paracetamol and methoxyparacetamol were found in urines with two metabolites, namely, the glucuronidated and sulfated form. In our data, these metabolites were characterized by a large number of ion products. In fact, the more paracetamol present in a urine samples, the larger the number of observed ion products. The