>MATERIALS AND METHODS   Mass spectrometry data acquisition method development   Extraction of the sponge tissue is described in detail in  Supplementary Information . The extracted metabolites were dissolved in methanol (LC-MS grade) and analyzed with Agilent 1290 Infinity II UHPLC system (Agilent Technologies) using a Kinetex™ 1.7 μm C18 reversed phase UHPLC column (50 × 2.1 mm) coupled to a ImpactII ultra-high resolution Qq-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, GmbH, Bremen, Germany) equipped with ESI source. The gradient employed for chromatographic separation was 5% solvent B (100% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) with solvent A as 100% H 2 O, 0.1% formic acid for 3 min, a linear gradient of 5% B-95% B in 17 min, held at 95% B for 3 min, 95% B - 5% B in 1 min and held at 5% B for 2 min at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min throughout the run. MS spectra were acquired in positive ion mode from  m/z  100–2000 Da. An external calibration with ESI-L Low Concentration Tuning Mix (Agilent Technologies) was performed prior to data collection and internal lock-mass calibrant Hexakis(1H,1H,2H-perfluoroethoxy)phosphazene was used throughout the run. The capillary voltage of 4500 V, nebulizer gas pressure (N 2 ) of 2 bar, ion source temperature of 200 °C, dry gas flow of 9 L/min, spectral rate of 3 Hz for MS 1  and 6 Hz for MS 2  was used. For acquiring MS 2  data, seven most intense ions per MS 1  were selected, and collision induced dissociation energies in  Table S1  were used. Basic stepping function was used to fragment ions at 50% and 125% of the CID calculated for each  m/z  from  Table S1  with timing of 50% for each step. Similarly, basic stepping of collision RF of 550 and 800 Vpp with a timing of 50% for each step and transfer time stepping of 75 and 90 μs with a timing of 50% for each step was employed. MS/MS active exclusion parameter was set to 2 and released after 30 sec. The mass of internal lock-mass calibrant was excluded from the MS 2  list. Data analysis by molecular networking and MS2LDA is described in detail in  Supplementary Information Fluorescence microscopy   Sponge tissue sectioning is described in the  Supplementary Information . Fluorescence microscopy was performed at 20× on sponge tissue cross-sections prior to either higher resolution fluorescence imaging at 100×, or, MALDI-MSI. Vacuum desiccated samples were imaged with a Plan-Apochromat 20×/0.8 M27, from Carl Zeiss Microscopy (Thornwood, NY, US), under ambient conditions. All fluorescent images were acquired using a Zeiss LSM 780 AxioObserver and processed in Zeiss Zen Black (Version 14.0.12.201). Images were collected in tile scans spanning the entire sample area with 10% frame overlap. The 8 μm sections were imaged at 100× magnification using an alpha Plan-Apochromat 100×/1.46 Oil DIC M27 Elyra objective from Carl Zeiss Microscopy (Thornwood, NY, US). These sections were mounted in Prolong Gold antifade (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, US) following 60 min vacuum desiccation. The sections in Prolong Gold were cured for 24 h under a coverslip and subsequently sealed. Chlorophyll was imaged using 488 nm excitation and emission was collected at 647–721 nm. Using spectral imaging an autofluorescence profile was used to visualize sponge tissue. For the autofluorescence profile of sponge tissue, an excitation of 488 nm was used and emission band was collected from 493 to 556 nm. Fluorescence channels were the same at 20× and 100× resolution. Linear contrast enhancements were applied to images for clarity. MALDI imaging data acquisition   Optical images were acquired using a gel scanner at 1200 dpi resolution prior to fluorescence imaging and MALDI matrix application. Deposition of MALDI matrix (5 mg/mL DHB solution in MeCN:H 2 O 60:40, 0.2% formic acid) was performed utilizing iMatrix sprayer in 20 passes with a spray density of 1 μL/cm 2 . The matrix-coated slides were dried under vacuum for 60 min. MALDI-MSI data was acquired using a Bruker rapifleX MALDI Tissuetyper™ system operating in reflectron positive mode from  m/z  200–2000 Da (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). The smartbeam 3D laser was operated in a single scan mode setting (imaging −20 μm) and the image acquired using a pitch of 20 μm. The laser was operated at 10 kHz and 200 shots per pixel were recorded. Calibration was performed prior to MALDI-MSI data acquisition using red phosphorous deposited on the ITO slide. Instrument control was achieved via flexControl 4.0 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) and imaging acquisition was performed using flexImaging 5.0 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). Total ion current was utilized as normalization method. To display two-dimensional ion intensity maps, false colors are assigned to ions in the overall average mass spectrum in the flexImaging software or SCiLS Lab Pro 3D software (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). RESULTS AND DISCUSSION   Chemical extraction and data acquisition   S. aurea  was collected by hand at a depth of 4–7 m at the Wonderland Reef in the Florida Keys.  S. aurea  was identified by visual inspection with characteristic large oscula and a fleshy yellow interior ( Fig. 1a ). Sponge specimens were frozen at −80 °C pending chemical extraction. Total DNA was isolated from sponge tissue preserved in RNAlater and used as template for 18S rDNA amplification using previously described protocols [ 23 ]. Sanger sequencing of multiple clones from the 18S rDNA amplicon clone library and comparison against sequence databases by BLAST confirmed the identity of the sponge specimen. Extraction of lyophilized sponge material with MeOH at room temperature yielded a bright green extract which was analyzed by LC-MS/MS without any derivatization or  a priori  fractionation. Sponge tissue was embedded in a polymer matrix and sectioned at low temperature for microscopy. Fluorescence microscopy was used to visualize the cyanobacterial cells within the sponge tissue ( Fig. 1b ). The cyanobacterial cells, observed by autofluorescence of cyanobacterial chlorophyll, are represented in green. The cyanobacterial cells are localized to the sponge ectosome, as has been observed for other cyanobacteria harboring sponges. The sponge tissue was visualized by spectral imaging and is shown in red.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Anatomy of  S. aurea . ( a ) Marine sponge  S. aurea . ( b ) Photomicrographs of an 8 μm section of  S. aurea  embedded in gelatin, acquired by fluorescence microscopy at 100×. The cyanobacterial cells are colored in green and sponge skeleton is colored in red. The scale bar is at 20 μm. Marine sponges are among the most prolific producers of small organic molecules in the marine environment with exceedingly complex metabolomes [ 12 ]. To describe metabolome diversity from  S. aurea , we used a molecular networking-based approach to organize and annotate the metabolome ( Fig. 2 ). We describe our findings with data acquired in the positive ionization mode. As most spectral annotations for natural products and other organic molecules are commonly available in the positive ionization mode only, and, as the motivation of the study is to use and enrich the existing spectral libraries for compound dereplication ( vide infra ), we have used data collected in the positive mode only. Structurally related metabolites result in MS 2  fragment ions that are either identical in mass or differ by common mass shifts, representing chemical modifications such as methylation, acetylation, oxidation, and glycosylation, among others. In molecular networking, this structural relatedness is represented in the form of molecular networks comprising of nodes and edges. Each node is a metabolite and connecting nodes are structurally related metabolites (molecular family), or can also be isotopes (for example, resulting from presence of halogen atoms), adducts (for example, sodium adducts), and ions with mixed MS 2  spectra (spectra arising from fragmentation of multiple precursor ions). Molecular networks were generated using the publicly available web-based infrastructure  G lobal  N atural  P roducts  S ocial Molecular Networking (GNPS) ( https://gnps.ucsd.edu ) and the MS 2  spectra are searched against various spectral libraries incorporated within GNPS, such as, MassBank of North America, European MassBank, ReSpect, CASMI, and other third-party spectral libraries [ 5 ]. Using the molecular networking approach for the  S. aurea  metabolomics dataset, 14710 MS 2  spectra were organized into 1615 nodes that formed 149 individual connected clusters consisting of 861 nodes, also called molecular families ( Fig. 2 ). The rest, ~750 nodes, were singletons, implying that no structural neighbors could be identified for these ions by molecular networking. These singletons have been omitted in  Fig. 2  for clarity.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   The molecular network for the metabolome of  S. aurea.  Node clusters are labeled with the structural class of natural products that they correspond to, with the chemical structures of a few representative molecules discussed in the manuscript shown. For clarity, 750 singleton nodes were removed from this illustration. By spectral matching to MS 2  spectral libraries, only 33 of 1615 nodes (2.0%) resulted in putative annotations. This low number of automated annotations reflects the sparse nature of spectral libraries that are contemporarily available, and emphasizes the need to bring more mass spectrometry data into the public domain with careful annotation of small molecules. Library and literature-based manual annotation of data revealed molecular families corresponding to lipids, fatty acids, amino acid metabolites, polyols, various indole alkaloids, terpenes, peptide/polyketide hybrid molecules, and pyrones, which we describe below. The singular network-based representation elegantly demonstrates the tremendous chemical diversity of the  S. aurea  metabolome ( Fig. 2 ). Next, we intended to decipher how much of the sponge chemical diversity was described by the molecular networking approach, and assess whether we could enrich the molecular annotations in the molecular network and use imaging mass spectrometry to gain insight into the differential spatial organization of molecules within the sponge tissue. Dereplication of peptide/polyketide hybrid molecules   The MS 1  spectra corresponding to the node with  m/z  501.252 ( Fig. 3 , in yellow), to which no spectral match in MS 2  spectral libraries was present, demonstrated an isotopic pattern consistent with the presence of one chlorine atom. A MarinLit, Dictionary of Natural Products, and PubChem database compound search of exact mass (500.244 Da) and molecular formula C 28 H 37 ClN 2 O 4  did not yield an acceptable annotation. Literature search of compounds isolated from marine sponges, specifically  S. aurea , and manual annotation of the MS 2  ions revealed that the node with  m/z  501.252 corresponds to hybrid peptide/polyketides known as smenamides (theoretical [M+H] 1+ = 501.252, found = 501.252, error = 0 ppm) [ 18 ]. An  e xtracted  i on  c hromatogram (EIC) for  m/z  = 501.252 ± 0.01 Da demonstrated two distinct peaks, likely corresponding to isomeric smenamide A ( 1 ) and smenamide B ( 2 ) that have been described in the literature ( Fig. 3a ) [ 18 ]. Due to identical MS/MS fragmentation, spectra corresponding to  1  and  2  were condensed in a single node in the molecular network. The connected node,  m/z  503.250, is the Cl 37  isotope of  1 ,  2 .   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Dereplication and distribution of peptide/polyketide hybrid smenamides. ( a ) EIC of molecule with  m/z  501.252 corresponding to isomeric  1 ,  2 . ( b ) Fluorescence microscopy-based localization of cyanobacteria by autofluorescence of chlorophyll (in purple) and of sponge tissue (in green). ( c ) MALDI-MSI analysis of localization of  1  and  2 , which overlaps with the autofluorescence of cyanobacteria in panel  b . The ion image was generated using SCiLS Lab Pro 3D software as a discriminatory  m/z  with a p value of 0.05. ( d ) Molecular network for smenamides, connected by spectral overlap (grey edges) and by MS2LDA motif conservation (green dashes) reveal new analogs of previously known smenamides  1 – 4 . ( e ) MS 2  spectra of  1  and  2  and structural annotation of MS 2  ions. ( f ) MS 2  spectra of previously unknown molecule with  m/z  543.299 (node in red color). Based on the annotation of MS 2  ions, the polyketide unit of  1 ,  2  contains additional (+)(CH 2 ) 3  corresponding to Δ m/z  of +42.047 in the precursor mass and MS 2  ions corresponding to polyketide unit. ( g ) MS 2  spectra of unknown molecule with  m/z  487.237 (node in purple color). Based on structural annotation of the observed MS 2  ions, the loss of the methyl group from the amide nitrogen at the left periphery of  1 ,  2  satisfies the observed MS 2  spectra. ( h ) MS 2  spectra of molecule with  m/z  453.252 (node in violet color) reveal previously unknown desmethyl analog of  3 ,  4 . Note the conservation of MS 2  ion corresponding to the polyketide chain between panels  g  and  h , implying that the loss of the methyl group occurs from the amine nitrogen at the left periphery of  3 ,  4 . The nodes colored in green are described in  supplementary Fig. S2 . The chemical structure of  1  and  2  bears a vinylogous chlorine appended to a hydrid polyketide-peptide backbone. Due to the presence of this structural motif in cyanobacterial natural products, such as the jamaicamides, cyanobacterial origin of smenamides within the sponge microbiome has been proposed [ 18 ,  24 ]. Symbiotically associated sponge cyanobacteria are resistant to laboratory cultivation, preventing the direct testing of this hypothesis [ 25 ]. We sought to determine the correlation between the spatial distribution of smenamides and cyanobacterial cells within the sponge tissue. Frozen  S. aurea  tissue was embedded in 20% gelatin, sectioned in 10 μm thickness slices using a cryomicrotome and thaw-mounted onto prechilled conductive slides. Maintaining a low temperature during sectioning, −15 °C in this study, was critical for efficient sectioning without damage to the sponge tissue ultrastructure. Querying the sectioned sponge tissue by fluorescence imaging clearly shows that the cyanobacterial symbionts in  S. aurea  are localized to the sponge ectosome, as visualized by the cyanobacterial chlorophyll autofluorescence ( Fig. 3b , in purple), and can be distinguished from the sponge choanosomal matrix, as visualized by the autofluorescence of the sponge tissue ( Fig. 3b , in green). On the same sponge section, we next employed MALDI-TOF MSI to query the localization of smenamides. An adduct of  1 ,  2 ,  m/z  561.277, with identical retention time and similar fragmentation spectra in ESI-MS/MS was observed by MALDI-TOF MSI ( Fig. S1 ). The ion image of  m/z  561.277 co-localizes with the chlorophyll autofluorescence of cyanobacterial cells in the sponge ectosome ( Fig. 3c ). These findings support the hypothesis that smenamides are likely produced by cyanobacterial symbionts present within  S. aurea . Our findings complement other molecular approaches, such as physical fractionation of sponge endosymbionts, metagenome sequencing, and hybridization of sequence specific fluorescent nucleotide probes that have been employed previously to establish cyanobacterial origins of organic molecules in the microbiomes of marine invertebrates [ 23 ,  26 – 29 ].   As delineated above,  1  and  2  have previously been isolated from  S. aurea . We next sought to interrogate whether analogs of  1  and  2  are present in the sponge. The  S. aurea  molecular network demonstrated an underappreciated diversity of smenamides within the sponge metabolome ( Fig. 2 ,  3d ). Various interconnected nodes suggest that previously unknown analogues of smenamides are also produced in  S. aurea . The node with  m/z  467.267 is the condensed node for previously described isomeric analogs smenamide C ( 3 ) and D ( 4 ), wherein the phenylalanine-derived benzylic moiety of  1  and  2  is replaced by the leucine side chain ( Fig. 3d ) [ 30 ]. Crucially,  3  and  4  were isolated from a marine cyanobacterial bloom and not from a marine sponge [ 30 ], thus illustrating that the biosynthetic potential to generate structurally similar natural products exists in both free-living cyanobacteria and sponge symbionts [ 31 ,  32 ].   The two nodes,  m/z  543.299 (in red,  Fig. 3f , Δ m/z  = +42.047 from 501.252 ( 1 ,  2 )) and  m/z  487.237 (in purple,  Fig. 3g , Δ m/z  −14.015 from 501.252 ( 1 ,  2 )) correspond, respectively, to a difference of (+)(CH 2 ) 3  and (−)CH 2  structural units from  1  and  2 . Where are these differences localized in the chemical structures of  1  and  2 ? Comparison of the MS 2  spectra of molecules with  m/z  543.299 ( Fig. 3f ) and  m/z  487.237 ( Fig. 3g ) against that for  1, 2  ( m/z  501.252,  Fig. 3e ) allow for putative structural assignments. All MS 2  ions corresponding to the alkyl chain for  1 ,  2  are shifted by +42.047 Da in  Fig. 3f . Hence, it is tantalizing to propose that the +42.047 Da (+(CH 2 ) 3 ) mass difference corresponds to the iterative incorporation of an additional methyl malonate derived polyketide extender unit in the smenamide biosynthetic scheme to generate the smenamide analog with  m/z  543.299. This biosynthetic promiscuity, as revealed by molecular networking and annotation of MS 2  spectra, is not without precedent in polyketide biosyntheses [ 33 ]. On the other hand, for the smenamide analog at  m/z  487.237 ( Fig. 3g ), the (−)14.015 Da (-CH 2 ) difference corresponds to the loss of methyl group (-CH 3 , +H) from  1 ,  2 . This loss of methyl group likely occurs from the methylated amide moiety at the left periphery of  1 ,  2 , as denoted by the conservation of MS 2  ions at  m/z  105.070 and m/z 161.0133 between  Fig. 3e  and  Fig. 3g , but the (−)14.015 Da shift in the MS 2  ions at  m/z  234.186,  m/z  262.180, and  m/z  298.157. All five polyketide MS 2  ions are conserved between  Fig. 3g  and  Fig. 3h . The node with  m/z  453.252 represents desmethyl analogs of  3 ,  4 . The spectra corresponding to all molecules described above have been added to MS 2  spectral library hosted by GNPS as smenamides and putative smenamide analogs.   At this point, the diversity of known smenamides has already been increased from the previously reported four molecules,  1 – 4 , to include five more structurally similar natural products. The well-defined and rich MS 2  spectra for smenamides ( Fig. 3e – h ) made us ask if we could even further expand the smenamide chemical diversity by searching for the conservation of distinct MS 2  ions- which correspond to structural elements with the smenamide core structure- across the  S. aurea  metabolome. To perform this search, we employed the online tool MS2LDA which organizes conservation between MS 2  spectra in the form of ‘motifs’ [ 34 – 36 ]. These motifs consist of a set of common MS 2  peaks and/or neutral losses that correspond to shared substructures between analogs. Sharing of motifs between different clusters within a network implies structural conservation even when the clusters are not joined together based on the spectral overlap, expressed as the cosine score, falling below the threshold value for cluster grouping. Motifs for all nodes within the smenamide cluster were tabulated ( Fig. S2a ) and their conservation across the  S. aurea  molecular network manually curated. We noted that the MS2LDA motif 528 ( Fig. S2a ) was conserved between multiple nodes in the smenamide cluster and nodes from a different second cluster ( Fig. 2 ,  3d ). In the absence of putative structure for node with  m/z  530.26 that connects the two clusters, the chemical substructure corresponding to the motif 528 cannot be predicted. However, manual inspection of the MS 2  spectra for nodes from the first cluster ( m/z  530.26) and from the second cluster ( m/z  532.276, 518.260, 504.245, and 461.202,  Fig. S2b ) clearly demonstrates that this second cluster of nodes also corresponds to smenamide analogs. While the spectral overlap between nodes from these two clusters is low enough that they are grouped together in separate clusters ( Fig. 3d ), conservation of MS2LDA derived motifs allowed us to connect the two clusters together. Thus, two clusters in the  S. aurea  network correspond to smenamides ( Fig. 2 ).   In addition to smenamides, hybrid polyketide-peptide molecules smenathiazole A and smenathiazole B were also detected ( Fig. S3 ). Smenamides and smenathiazoles possess potent cytotoxic and neurotoxic activities [ 18 ,  19 ,  30 ]. Discovery of natural analogs presents an opportunity to guide structure-activity relationships aiming at synthesis of diverse pharmacophores for drug discovery. Dereplication of indole alkaloids and their distribution within the sponge   The  S. aurea  metabolome is exceptionally rich in tryptophan-derived indolic natural products. Of these, two classes of molecules are conspicuous in the molecular network. First are the tryptamine derivatives. A large diversity of tryptamine derivatives, and their brominated analogs were detected in the  S. aurea  metabolome. Prominent molecules, tryptamine derivatives  5 – 10 , and brominated tryptamine derivatives  11 – 15  are described in  Fig. 4a  and  Table S2 . Curiously, clustering based on spectral overlap alone led to the tryptamine and the brominated tryptamine nodes getting organized in two separate clusters ( Fig. 4a ). Querying conserved MS2LDA motifs between nodes of these two clusters led to the identification of MS2LDA motif 480 ( Fig. S4 ) which is shared between the nodes corresponding to molecules  6  and  14  in the two clusters ( Fig. 4a ).   Figure 4.