>Methods   Study Populations   Study of Latino Adolescents at Risk.   This study used data from the Study of Latino Adolescents at Risk (SOLAR). As described previously, 16 , 49 – 51  the SOLAR cohort included 328 overweight/obese children recruited in two waves between 2001 and 2012. Participants completed yearly clinical visits at the General Clinical Research Center of the Clinical Trials Unit at the University of Southern California. At baseline, participants were between 8 and 13 years of age and were overweight or obese based on sex and age-specific body mass index (BMI) percentile  > 85 % . Participants were included in the study if they were Hispanic or Latino based on all parents and grandparents self-reporting as Hispanic or Latino and if they had a direct family history of type 2 diabetes. Participants were excluded from the study if they had type 1 or type 2 diabetes or if they were on medications known to influence glucose or insulin metabolism. For the present analysis, participants were included if they completed a 2-h oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) during their first or second visit, resulting in a total sample size of 312 participants. The institutional review board at the University of Southern California provided ethics approval for this study, and participants and their guardians provided written informed assent/consent prior to participation. Southern California Children’s Health Study.   To examine the generalizability of findings from the SOLAR cohort to young adults, we analyzed data from the Metabolic and Asthma Incidence Research (Meta-AIR) study. 52  Meta-AIR was a study including 172 young adults between the ages of 17 and 23 years of age who were part of the Southern California Children’s Health Study (CHS). 53  Meta-AIR participants were recruited for a single clinical visit between 2014 and 2018. Clinical visits occurred at the Clinical Trials Unit or the Diabetes and Obesity Research institute at the University of Southern California, during which participants performed a 2-h OGTT and completed detailed questionnaires. CHS participants were selected for inclusion in the Meta-AIR study if they had overweight or obesity between 14 and 15 years of age. Overweight and obesity were based on the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force guidelines, defined as having a sex- and age-specific BMI percentile  > 85 % . 54  Participants were excluded if they had a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus or if they took any medications that could influence glucose metabolism or insulin secretion. Meta-AIR participants were included in the present study if they provided consent for future use of biospecimens, resulting in a total sample size of 137. The University of Southern California institutional review board provided ethics approval for this study, and participants (and their guardians if participants were  < 18  years  of age) provided written informed assent/consent prior to participation. Covariates   Detailed information on the measurement of covariates in the SOLAR and CHS cohorts has been provided previously. 16 , 49 – 53  Height (in meters) and weight (in kilograms) were measured at each visit in both cohorts and were used to calculate BMI as kilograms per meter squared. In both cohorts, participants completed questionnaires related to sociodemographics and individual and familial health history. In the SOLAR cohort, socioeconomic status (SES) was characterized using a modified version of the Hollingshead Four-Factor Index, 55  as described previously. 49  The Hollingshead Four-Factor Index was modified to provide a single score for children and takes into account the education, occupation, and marital status of parents or primary caregivers. 49  In the CHS cohort, parental education was used to assess SES. 52  For the primary analysis, SES scores were grouped into quantiles and analyzed numerically, with values ranging from 1 to 4, with 1 representing the lowest and 4 representing the highest quantile of SES. In the SOLAR cohort, SES was unavailable for 11% ( n = 35 ) of individuals. In these participants, we imputed the population median SES score; median imputation has been shown to perform similarly to more complex imputation methods when the proportion of missing values is relatively low. 56  Further, as described previously, participants with missing SES data did not differ in metabolic or physical attributes, including sex (tested using a  χ 2  test;  p = 0.35 ), age (tested using an independent  t -test;  p = 0.88 ), or BMI (tested using an independent  t -test;  p = 0.94 ). 16 , 51   In the SOLAR cohort, Tanner stages were determined by a physician during a physical exam to assess sexual maturity. 57 , 58  Tanner stages range from 1 to 5 and were categorized as follows: stage 1: prepuberty, which is the developmental stage before secondary sex characteristics begin to develop; stages 2–4: puberty, which is the developmental stage when secondary sex characteristics begin developing and menarche occurs for most females; stage 5: postpuberty, the developmental stage where secondary sex characteristics, including pubic hair and secondary sex organs, reach maturity.   Covariates included in models were selected using directed acyclic graphs (DAGs; Figure S1) and included age (in years), sex (male/female, coded numerically as 0/1), BMI (in kilograms per meter squared), and SES (in quantiles, coded numerically as 1–4). In the SOLAR cohort, Tanner stage (Tanner stages 1–5, coded numerically as 1–5) and study wave (Wave 1/Wave 2, coded numerically as 0/1) were also included as covariates. No covariates for statistical models contained missing data, except SES in the SOLAR cohort (as described above). Plasma PFAS   Six common PFAS (PFOS, PFHxS, PFHpS, PFOA, PFNA, and PFDA) were quantified in plasma samples collected at the 2-h OGTT time point. PFAS levels were quantified in batches of 70 study samples via liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to HRMS (LC-HRMS). The specific LC-HRMS protocol used to measure plasmas PFAS for this study has been described previously. 59  Briefly, plasma samples were prepared by combining  40 μ L  of plasma with  2.5 μ L  of an internal standard. The internal standard contained thirty  C 13 -labeled PFAS to obtain a final  5  ng / mL  concentration. Proteins were then precipitated by adding  80 μ L  of cold acetonitrile, then vortexing and centrifuging at  18,000 × g  for 15 min. LC-MS grade water was added to the resulting supernatant to achieve a dilution ratio of 2:1. PFAS analysis was completed by reverse phase (RP) chromatography with negative electrospray ionization, performed with a Thermo Scientific Vanquish Flex ultra-high-performance LC system with binary pump attached to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   After analysis of samples from both the SOLAR and CHS cohorts, peaks for PFAS and their corresponding  C 13 -labeled PFAS were identified by matching mass  m/z  with a tolerance of  5  ppm , then extracted and integrated using TraceFinder 5.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Quantification of PFAS was performed by dividing the peak for a given PFAS with its corresponding internal standard and comparing this value to a calibration curve with 6 points created using charcoal-stripped plasma. Replicate measures of National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 1957 and NIST 1958 standard reference material were performed for every batch of 70 samples. Each batch also included instrumental and method blanks. The coefficient of variation for major PFAS was  < 15 % , whereas the analyte recovery was  > 90 % . The accuracy of the method was assessed by comparing with NIST standard reference materials. Method accuracy was also assessed by participating in the Center de toxicologie du Québec’s Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program Ring Test for Persistent Organic Pollutants in Human Serum. The limits of detection (LODs) were as follows: PFOS:  0.43 μ g / L ; PFHxS:  0.01 μ g / L ; PFHpS:  0.05 μ g / L ; PFOA:  0.01 μ g / L ; PFNA:  0.01 μ g / L ; and PFDA:  0.01 μ g / L . PFDA was the only PFAS included in the present study that had values below the LOD; these values were imputed as LOD divided by the square root of 2.   To contextualize exposure levels in the SOLAR and CHS cohorts, we compared the geometric mean and 95% confidence interval of PFAS concentrations to appropriate period- and age-matched PFAS concentrations from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). 60  For the SOLAR cohort, PFAS concentrations were compared with those in young persons 12–19 years of age from the NHANES survey years 2007–2008, given that this was near the middle of the study period for this cohort. For the CHS cohort, PFAS concentrations were compared with those in young persons 12–19 years of age from the NHANES survey years 2017–2018, which overlapped in time with the CHS cohort and was the only survey year in which PFHpS concentrations were reported. Untargeted Plasma Metabolomics   Untargeted plasma metabolomics were measured using samples collected at the 2-h OGTT time point. Previous studies have shown that metabolite concentrations following a glucose challenge are potentially more informative when examining alterations in metabolic pathways because the glucose challenge is a physiological stressor that requires metabolic flexibility. 61 , 62  Measuring untargeted metabolomics was performed using established methods, 63  as described previously. 59  Briefly, LC-HRMS was performed with RP and hydrophilic interaction LC (HILIC) by employing a dual polarity/dual column approach. Analyses were performed with a Thermo Fisher Vanquish Duo LC system with dual pumps and columns with independent flow paths connected to a Thermo Fisher Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap MS system. Samples were analyzed in RP and HILIC separately to allow for the analysis of all four LC-HRMS modes.   Before analysis, samples for RP were prepared using the methods described above in the section “Plasma PFAS”. 59  Samples for HILIC were prepared using the methods described above, with minor alterations in the volumes as described previously. Specifically, for HILIC mode,  90 μ L  of acetonitrile was added to  30 μ L  of plasma before processing was continued as described above. For HILIC mode,  30 μ L  of the processed supernatant was added to  90 μ L  1:1 (vol/vol) water/acetonitrile. As described previously, samples were analyzed with both positive and negative ionization by optimizing mobile phases. 59  Separation for RP was performed using  C 18  (TARGA  C 18   5 μ m   50 × 2.1 mm ; Higgins Analytical), whereas separation for HILIC was performed using a SeQuant ZIC-HILIC column ( 3.5 μ m , 200A  4.6 × 50 mm ; MilliporeSigma) for positive mode, and an Amide ethylene bridged hybrid (BEH) HILIC column ( 3.5 μ m , 130A  3 × 50 mm ; Waters) in negative mode. Measurement of mass spectral data was performed for a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) scan range of 85 to 1,275, and the resolution was 120,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). Additional details on this method are provided by Goodrich et al. 59   Following analysis of all samples from the SOLAR and CHS cohorts, mass spectral peaks for metabolites were extracted with apLCMS and xMSanalyzer. 63 , 64  Extraction was performed across all study samples concurrently and was performed separately for each of the four LC-HRMS modes. After extracting LC-MS features, adjustment for inter- and intra-batch variation was performed using a random forest signal correction algorithm based on quality control samples run in tandem with study samples. 65  As part of the random forest signal correction algorithm, features that were not detected in  > 25 %  of samples were removed from further analysis. Features were also removed from further analysis if the coefficient of variability in all quality control samples post-correction was  > 30 % . After LC-MS data processing, the total number of features included in data analysis was 23,166, including 3,711 features from the  C 18 -negative mode, 5,069 features from the  C 18 -positive mode, 7,442 features from the HILIC-negative mode, and 6,944 features from the HILIC-positive mode. Statistical Analysis   Differences in PFAS levels and participant characteristics between cohorts were examined using independent  t -tests (for natural log-transformed PFAS concentrations and continuous participant characteristics) and chi-square tests (for categorical participant characteristics). Spearman correlation coefficients were calculated to examine associations between PFAS levels within each cohort. All analyses were performed with R (version 4.1.2; R Development Core Team). Metabolome-Wide Association Study   To examine associations between PFAS mixtures and each metabolite, we performed a metabolome-wide association study (MWAS) using a Bayesian hierarchical regression modeling approach with g-computation (BHRM-g). We implemented a Bayesian g-computation approach 66 , 67  to obtain both individual PFAS-specific estimates conditional on all other PFAS in the model and a single mixture effect estimate for the overall PFAS mixture. The approach is similar to quantile g-computation. 68  Specifically, BHRM-g combines:  a ) a g-prior specification for the corresponding exposure effects to provide robust estimation of highly correlated exposures, 69   b ) a Bayesian stochastic selection procedure to estimate the posterior inclusion probability (PIP) of each PFAS in the PFAS mixtures, 67  and  c ) Bayesian g-computation in a potential outcome framework for estimating the overall mixture effect based on two hypothetical exposure profiles (explained in further detail below). 67  In contrast to Bayesian Kernel Machine Regression, which uses Gaussian process regression and models a nonlinear dose–response relationship, BHRM-g estimates a mixture effect from the additive terms from a regression model with each exposure and forces explicit specification of nonlinear effects. 70  We modeled the dose–response with a linear function that allows for the calculation of a single monotonic effect estimate that is not dependent on the baseline exposure profile; this aids in interpretation and allows for additional downstream analysis. In this analysis, we independently fit the following model for each metabolite  Y :    Y i = α p + ∑ P γ p β p X p + ∑ Q δ q U q + ϵ i ,   where  X p  is a scaled variable for PFAS exposure  p  with corresponding estimate  β p ;  γ p  is a binary variable indicating the inclusion of PFAS exposure  p  in the mixture; and  U q  is a set of  q  covariates with corresponding effect estimates