>Methods   Sample collection   Samples were obtained from 197 individual broiler chickens from 22 farms spanning 3 countries. Per chicken, four drops of blood were sampled in independent spots on “Whatman tm  903 Protein Saver Cards” blood spot cards (BSC) (Sigma-Aldrich Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). Countries were selected based on availability of on-site experts to perform the sampling and willingness of local farmers to participate in the experiment. Furthermore, the participating countries are important chicken-producing countries in their respective continents and thus well suited for an initial impression of the variation present in chicken metabolomes. In general, each continent uses a different basal feed composition based on agricultural availability, which was an additional reason for including multiple countries across continents.   Sampling was performed by the country broiler expert/coordinator together with the local farmer. Prior to sampling, instructions and BSCs, together with sealing bags, moisture indicators and desiccant bags were sent by the UMC Utrecht team to the country expert/coordinator. The instruction video provided to the on-site experts for sampling can be found at  https://tinyurl.com/bscumc .   In this rather uncontrolled field experiment, we wanted to capture a maximum amount of variation, to understand whether metabolic health classification is feasible on the basis of the perceived overall health status of the broilers as classified by the local farmers and country experts. Rather than registering specific characteristics, country experts registered a healthy (‘high’ health) and unhealthy (‘low’ health) label for each chicken, on the basis of several commonly seen and widely accepted characteristics: reduced animal size relative to the farm average, rough feathers, reduced activity, and/or presence of dirty feathers near the vent (Fig.  1 a).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Using multi-country metabolomics data from blood drawn from chickens to find a molecular signature for chicken health.  a ,  b  Sample collection, mass spectrometry and pre-processing through  MetaboShiny . SP = Spain, IT = Italy, BR = Brazil.  c  ‘Leave-One-Country-Out’ analysis used one left out country as the testing set in a random forest (RF) model, as opposed to a regular train/test split. This process was repeated for each country.  d  50% of samples of each country were used for either feature selection or machine learning.  e  For feature selection, t-test and fold-change analyses were combined into a volcano plot and the ‘V-score’ (see Methods) was calculated per m/z.  f  The top or bottom ranking m/z values were used to limit the number of m/z values used in the subsequent feature selection step.  g  For each m/z selection, 3 types of models were built. Original label order representing the v-score, non-permuted data, shuffled labels representing negative control on the class label, and an equal number of random m/z values and regular label order.  h  With the optimal number of features, the final model was built and evaluated on a separate test set Each farm sampled 50% healthy and 50% unhealthy chickens regardless of on-site health distribution. Blood was drawn through syringe from the brachial wing vein and dripped onto the BSC. In total, Brazil supplied 98 BSCs distributed across 10 farms, Italy supplied 30 BSCs distributed across 5 farms and Spain supplied 69 BSCs distributed across 7 farms.   After being dried at room temperature, ranging from 5 h to overnight, the BSCs were stored in sealed plastic bags with desiccant and moisture level monitoring cards and stored at 4 °C. After collection of cards from all farms within a country was completed, they were shipped to the UMC Utrecht (transit time: 2–7 days) for further processing, Upon arrival BSCs were stored at -80 °C until analysis. BSCs on which the blood spots were not dripped as instructed or those that contained smears were excluded from the analysis. Data acquisition   Data acquisition was performed using our in-house pipeline for direct infusion mass spectrometry, as described by (de Sain-van der Velden et al.,  2017 ). In short, from each blood spot card a 3 mm disk was punched and extracted in an ultrasonic bath with acetonitrile, formic acid and internal standards. Run order was randomised based on farm and, if multiple countries were measured simultaneously, country.   Following extraction, the samples were filtered and subjected to chip-based nano electrospray DI-MS analysis in positive and negative mode using an Advion TriVersa Nanomate combined with a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive HF high resolution mass spectrometer. In positive and negative ion modes, the signal was collected for 3 min and 1.5 min, respectively, using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive high resolution mass spectrometer. Three technical replicates were measured per blood spot and the resulting signal was saved as a.raw Thermo file for each replicate. The raw files and metadata including country, breed, temperature at sampling, sex, and feed type is hosted on  MetaboLights  alongside the raw data. Processing   ThermoFileReader  was used to convert raw files to. mzML . Using the  xcms  package, files were divided into positive and negative mode scans based on the available metadata (Domingo-Almenara & Siuzdak, 2020). Samples with a low total intensity in either positive or negative mode were excluded from further analysis.   Scans were aligned to each other per mode and replication, using a list of m/z values observed in > 80% of samples, only found in internal standards. The spectra of each mode were then collected, yielding one positive and one negative spectrum per sample. Per sample, the  MALDIquant  program was used to call peaks (Gibb & Strimmer,  2012 ). Next, all files associated with the aforementioned experiments were gathered, and a summary of all peak tables was created. To facilitate statistical analysis, spectra were binned/aligned to each other using  MALDIquant  at 2 ppm (parts per million).   The binned spectra were combined into a table and exported to a  MetaboShiny -supported table. Only the peaks observed in 2/3 technical triplicates were kept, and the peak signals of the replicates were averaged. A table including data on the day-of-run batch and injection order was also exported for batch correction purposes. The raw file pipeline can be found on Github for SLURM-supporting compute clusters in the  joannawolthuis/MassChecker  repository. Filtering and normalization   Peaks with more than 20% missing samples were excluded from the analysis based on Bijlsma et al. ( 2006 )’s recommendation. Peak intensities were quantile-adjusted for each sample and then auto-scaled to Z-score format per m/z value. The  WaveICA  package was then used to correct any batch effect, using both the day-of-run batch and injection order (Chong & Xia,  2018 ; Deng et al.,  2019 ; Gibb & Strimmer,  2012 ; Wolthuis et al.,  2020 ). Post batch-correction, batches no longer clustered together majorly in UMAP (Fig. S1). Machine learning and cross-validation   We used the Random Forest (RF) model as implemented in the  caret  package for training predictive models. For the Leave-One-Country-Out (LOCO) experiment, we built a model for each country, with the  mtry  parameter of the model set to the square root of all m/z values available in the dataset. The LOCOCV Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) and Precision-Recall (PR) curves were calculated by combining the country-fold classifications.   Before any analysis takes place the dataset is split in two equal folds using  caret ’s  createFolds  function (Fig.  1 a). One fold (50% of the data) is used for feature selection and determination of the number of top ranking m/z values. Within the other 50% data fraction, 80% of the data was used to construct a model on the top N m/z values ranked on the V-score, where N is determined by the feature selection procedure (see below). The resulting RF model was tested on the remaining 20%, and the model creation and testing process was repeated 10 times. Feature selection   Within the feature selection fold, we further defined 10 folds. In each fold, we performed t-test and fold-change analyses through  MetaboShiny . To enable ranking of m/z-values in further steps we use the T-test -log(p) and log2(FC) outcome of the fold-change analysis. To this end, we visualised these two outcomes in a volcano plot and calculated a combined V-score per m/z value.   V - score = - log 10 p - value × log 2 fold - change   The columns in the dataset were ranked in order of descending absolute V-score (Fig.  1 b). We next evaluated classification capability for subsets of the datasets by progressively adding or removing m/z columns according to the V-score ranking. For each evaluation the  mtry  parameter of the RF model was set to the square root of the amount of m/z values present in that subset of the dataset (Fig.  1 c).   For each evaluation we included two negative controls. Negative control 1 (‘ shuffled’ ) is defined as the dataset using permuted class labels, which acts as a control of the classification quality. Negative control 2 (' randomised m/z’ ) is defined as the dataset using a randomly selected same-sized set of m/z values taken from the complete dataset, which was used to assess if the V-score ranked classifier outperforms a classifier based on randomly selected m/z columns. The final number of selected m/z values was determined by comparing the AUROC for negative control 2 to the V-score ranked dataset (Fig.  1 d).   To obtain a compact signature, models were first built adding 10 m/z values per step (starting with 2, 12, 22, etc.), and additionally on a per-m/z basis for the top 300 m/z values to more accurately determine the optimum amount of m/z values necessary.   For the experiment removing high-ranking m/z values (‘expanded’ signature), the complete experiment used models built by removing 10 m/z values per step. For each subset of m/z values, the tenfold cross-validated AUROC was calculated. Lines were fit to the V-score ranked and both negative control AUROCs using  ggplot2 ’s  geom_smooth  function.   For both signature determinations, the line fit summarising the V-score-ranked AUROC was used. For the compact signature, peak detection was used to find a peak in the top 300 V-score-ranked m/z values. For the expanded signature, the elbow point of the line removing m/z values in descending absolute V-score order (high-ranking first) was used as the signature threshold. The m/z values included in the expanded signature were used in the enrichment analysis. Correlation analysis   Correlation between m/z values was calculated using the  cor  function in R, specifying Pearson correlation. We visualised the heatmap using the  ggplot2  package, where only correlation pairs with a p-value < 0.05 were coloured. Enrichment   Using the expanded signature, we performed  mummichog  enrichment analysis using the  MetaboShiny- integrated  MetaboAnalystR  package. We adapted the algorithm to use adducts selected by the user (in our case the adducts provided in Table S1). Necessary pathway databases ‘ Gallus gallus’  (KEGG ID:  gga01100 ) and ‘ microbial metabolism in diverse environments’ (KEGG ID :  map01120)  were newly generated using the  build.pathway.KEGG  function which uses the  KEGGREST  package to retrieve necessary organism, pathway and compound information. In addition, custom adducts were generated for each compound (table S1).   The KEGG chicken pathway collection includes amino acid synthesis pathways for amino acids that chickens cannot synthesise. For this reason, after first downloading the complete  gga01100  pathway collection, we next removed pathways involved in synthesising any of the thirteen chicken essential amino acids: arginine, cysteine, histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, proline, threonine, tryptophan, tyrosine and valine as described by He et al. ( 2021 ). To that end, pathways featuring the following modules were excluded: ‘ proline biosynthesis, glutamate  >  proline’ , ‘ cysteine biosynthesis, homocysteine  +  serine  >  cysteine ’, and  ‘arginine biosynthesis, ornithine  >  arginine ’. These filtering steps lead to the exclusion of the pathways ‘ arginine biosynthesis’ , ‘ valine, leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis’  and ‘ phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis’.   In determining the enriched pathways in the expanded signature, we relied on the previously published  mummichog  method (Li et al.,  2013 ) .  A predetermined amount of m/z values was marked as significant based on if they were present in the 3784-m/z signature or not. Enriched pathways with  mummichog  EASE p ≤ 0.05 were included in further interpretation. Visualization   We used the  ggplot2, ggrepel ,  ggbeeswarm, ggsignif, ggforce, moonBook, visNetwork  and  plotly  packages, most through our application  MetaboShiny,  to visualise most results (Sievert et al.,  2016 ; Wickham,  2011 ). An adapted version of the  pathview  package was implemented in  MetaboShiny  and used to generate KEGG metabolic pathway images and project V-scores onto these pathway diagrams (Luo & Brouwer,  2013 ). Results   Leave-One-Country-Out analysis demonstrates model flexibility   Our goal was to define a chicken health m/z signature that is globally applicable and thus may also be applied to chicken samples from other countries not presented in the training dataset, irrespective of environment, housing and feeding conditions. To emulate this scenario, we designed and applied a ‘Leave-One-Country-Out’ (LOCO) strategy, where data from one country were excluded from the training set, and used as the testing set instead.   We first used Random Forest (RF) classifiers to construct classifying models whilst allowing the RF access to all m/z features, i.e. no feature selection was part of this setup (Fig.  1 c). Figure  2  reports the AUROC (Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic) and AUPRC (Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve) for each model.   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   AUROC and AUPRC of LOCOCV models. AUC of both original and shuffled models is displayed in the lower right of each curve.  a  LOCOCV curves were drawn and evaluated by combining the three separate ‘folds’ of LOCO analysis into one pool and calculating the resulting complete cross-validated curves.  b  Per-country LOCO model evaluation. Country in header indicates country used as testing set.  c  ‘Multi-country’ model is a general model evaluated using tenfold CV without removal of specific countries We built two types of models; a multi-country model and a Leave-One-Country-Out model. For the multi-country model tenfold cross validation was used, where the splits were stratified based on health label and country. This model used samples from all countries in both the training and testing set. The model reached an AUROC of 0.80 and AUPRC of 0.82 (Fig.  2 a). As a negative control, we include a model using permuted health labels and these models showed low classification capability as the AUROC and AUPRC were close to 0.5.   To train the LOCOCV model, we used threefold cross validation (CV) such that each left out fold was a complete country (Fig.  2 b). The LOCOCV model is aimed at estimating how well the model would do on a novel country, where the desired maximum AUROC/AUPRC would be close to the multi-country model. The resulting model had an AUROC of 0.75 and AUPRC of 0.68.   The LOCOCV model has a similar classification capability to the multi-country model (ΔAUROC = 0.05), and this suggests both inter-country similarity and potential usability of the multi-country model in novel countries.   To give further insight into which countries had the most classification capability, we dissected the LOCOCV curve into its separate test countries (Fig.  2 c).   The LOCO model tested on Italy and trained on the other countries classified best with an AUROC of 0.91 and AUPRC of 0.89. The Spain models had an AUROC of 0.81 and AUPRC of 0.82, and Brazil had an AUROC of 0.65 and AUPRC of 0.56.   In two out of three country folds, the model classifies better than the multi-country model, further suggesting inter-country similarity in terms of health metabolomic signature and suitability of the multi-country model for use in novel countries. Compact 25-m/z signature stratifies health with high accuracy   Next, we aimed to create a model that is both compact and optimally discriminative, as a model with few metabolites facilitates the creation of a testing panel in future applications, where metabolite concentrations can be quantified on an a per-metabolite basis using preselected standards. To find the minimum set of metabolites required for accurate classification, we performed a forward feature selection strategy. To this end, we first ranked the m/z values based on the ‘V-score’, a score combining T-test and fold-change analysis results.   To estimate the optimal number of m/z values that should be used in a model, we compared the AUROC of models using m/z values ranked by decreasing absolute V-score (black curve) with the AUROC of a model using a random equal number of m/z values as a negative control (blue curve) for all top ranking m/z values, starting with top 2 up to 7672 m/z values (Fig.  3 a). We observed the highest AUC for a model trained on 25 m/z values, referred to as the compact signature. Importantly, at this threshold, the model classified better than a model using 25 random m/z values. Furthermore, using fewer m/z values caused a rapid decrease in AUROC.   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Using V-score ranking to find the smallest most classifying set of top ranking m/z values.  a  AUROC plot against the number of m/z values used. Bottom panel zooms in on the top m/z values. Calculated peak of the fit curve is labelled at x = 25. The grey shading around each fit visualises the 95% confidence interval of the line fit by the geom_smooth algorithm.  b  AUCs of 10 original ranked models vs. 10 randomised m/z models. T-test p-value is noted above the boxplots.  c  ROCs of test sets of 10 original models, 10 shuffled models using original m/z order, and 10 models using randomised m/z values In the validation set, the average AUROC of the compact signature was above both the random 25-m/z model and shuffled health label models (Fig.  3 b), demonstrating that a model based on the top 25 m/z values was significantly more effective ( p  =  1.9e-10 ; t-test) than using randomly selected m/z values in an independent validation set.   Furthermore, as shown in Fig.  3 c, both using the compact signature and a random signature classify significantly better than a negative control model with permuted health labels (signature vs. shuffled : p  <  2.2e−16 , randomised vs. shuffled:  p  <  2.2e−16, t-test ). Model interpretation using mummichog enrichment analysis   To gain biological insights and understand which metabolic pathways play a role in chicken health, we performed enrichment analysis of the metabolites in the signature. However, while the compact signature worked well for classifying chicken health, due to the presence of adducts and metabolic pathway interactions, the metabolites corresponding to the 25 m/z-values likely do not capture the full biological signal (Fig.  4 a).   Fig. 4.     Open in a new tab   M/z values are highly correlated.  a  Volcano plot of the 25-m/z signature.  b  Heatmap of Pearson correlation between the top 25 (y-axis) and top 300 V-score ranked (x-axis) m/z values To quantify the degree of correlation in the data, we calculated the Pearson correlation between each pair of V-score ranked top 300 m/z values. The m/z values in the top 25 signature were often highly correlated to m/z values within the top 300 (Fig.  4 b). Therefore, we defined a second signature capturing the full biological signal including all correlated m/z. This signature used more m/z values than strictly necessary for an accurate classification, but included the complete set of m/z values defining what differentiated healthy and unhealthy chickens and may therefore be more suitable for interpretation.   The expanded signature size was defined as the number of features that needed to be removed before the difference between a completely random classifying model and our model missing top ranking features reached a low plateau. This resulted in selection of the 3784 top ranking m/z values in our expanded signature (Fig.  5 a).   Fig. 5.     Open in a new tab   Determining expanded V-score based m/z signature.  a  Black line represents non randomised health based on V-score-ordered m/z values; peaks in this line are of interest. Blue line represents models made with random m/z values. Red line represents label-shuffled models. The grey shading around each fit visualises the 95% confidence interval of the line fit by the  geom _ smooth  algorithm.  b  Enrichment analysis result using the KEGG  gallus gallus  pathway collection.  c  Enrichment results using the pathways in the KEGG  microbial metabolism in diverse environments  pathway collection Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the m/z values in the expanded signature. Only a limited number of methods is available to achieve this for untargeted metabolomics data. We utilised the  mummichog  enrichment method within the  MetaboAnalystR  package and adapted for custom adducts and pathway filtering, integrated in  MetaboShiny  (Chong et al.,  2018 ; Li et al.,  2013 ; Wolthuis et al.,  2020 ). We first ran  mummichog  using the  gallus gallus  KEGG pathway collection (Fig.  5 b, Table S2).   In this pathway collection ,  four pathways were significantly altered:  ‘D-amino acid metabolism’, ‘glycine, serine and threonine metabolism, ‘phenylalanine metabolism’  and ‘ valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation ’. Furthermore, we included potential bacterial meta