>Methods   Ethics Statement   This study was approved by the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Human Research Protection Program. Research adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and was conducted in accordance with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before study enrollment. Study Participants   Study participants were recruited from the Vanderbilt Eye Institute between 2002 and 2011. All patients were of European descent and at least 55 years old at enrollment. Each participant underwent a comprehensive eye exam administered by a fellowship-trained retina specialist that included slit-lamp biomicroscopy and dilated fundus examination with indirect ophthalmoscopy. High-resolution color fundus photography was obtained via a Zeiss 450+ fundus camera (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA). Using the five-step Clinical Age-Related Maculopathy Scale (CARMS), 12  a modified version of the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) grading system, 13  each participant was assigned an AMD grade from 1 to 5 based on the more severely affected eye. For the current study, cases were NVAMD patients ( n  = 100) with AMD Grade 5 in one or both eyes. Grade 5 was defined as extensive AMD characterized by choroidal neovascularization, subretinal hemorrhage or fibrosis, or photocoagulation scarring consistent with AMD treatment. Of the 100 NVAMD patients, 92 had Grade 5 in both eyes, while the remaining eight had Grade 4 (geographic atrophy) in the fellow eye. Controls ( n  = 192) were patients with AMD Grade 1 in both eyes, defined as fewer than 10 small drusen and no macular pigment changes.   At study enrollment, using a 21- or 23-gauge butterfly needle, blood was drawn from participants into 8.5 mL Acetate-Citrate-Dextrose tubes containing 1.5 mL Solution A (trisodium citrate 22.0 g/L, citric acid 8.0 g/L, and dextrose 24.5 g/L; Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). These tubes were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 4°C. Plasma was transferred to 1.5 mL conical tubes and immediately stored at −80°C.   Detailed demographic information and history of environmental exposures and comorbid medical conditions, including height and weight, smoking status, diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia, were collected via a self-administered questionnaire. BMI was calculated using the reported height and weight. Participants who indicated they had ever smoked at least 100 cigarettes were considered smokers, while those who had smoked fewer than 100 cigarettes were considered nonsmokers. High-Resolution Untargeted Metabolomics   Frozen plasma samples were thawed and analyzed by LC-MS at Emory University as described previously. 14 – 19  Plasma samples were randomized into 20-sample batches that included NVAMD patients and controls. Plasma aliquots (65 μL) were treated with 130 μL acetonitrile (2:1 vol/vol) containing 3.5 μL of an internal isotopic standard mix 17 – 19  and placed on ice for 30 minutes. Samples then were centrifuged for 10 minutes (16,100 g  at 4°C) to remove protein. The supernatants (10 μL) were loaded onto an Accela Open Autosampler maintained at 4°C. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate using a Thermo LTQ Velos Orbitrap high-resolution (60,000 mass resolution) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Diego, CA, USA) and C18 column chromotography. 14 , 20  Elution was obtained with a formic acid/acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 0.35 mL/min for the initial 6 minutes and 0.5 mL/min for the remaining 4 minutes. The first 2-minute period consisted of 5% solution A (2% [vol/vol] formic acid in water), 60% water, 35% acetonitrile. The final 4-minute period was maintained at 5% solution A, 95% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was set to collect mass/charge ratio ( m/z ) ranging from 85 to 850 over 10 minutes. Electrospray ionization was used in positive mode for detection. For quality control and assurance, pooled reference plasma was run before and after each batch of samples. Data Processing and Analysis   An adaptive processing software package, apLCMS (available in the public domain at  http://web1.sph.emory.edu/apLCMS/ ), designed for use with high-resolution mass spectrometry data, was used for noise removal and feature extraction, alignment, and quantification. 21  Each metabolic feature is defined by a unique combination of  m/z  and retention time (RT). To enhance the feature detection process and perform quality evaluation, systematic data re-extraction and statistical filtering were performed using xMSanalyzer (available in the public domain at  http://sourceforge.net/projects/xmsanalyzer/ ). 22  Each sample was analyzed in triplicate, and coefficient of variation (CV) was used to evaluate the quality of all features. Pearson correlation within technical replicates was used to evaluate the quality of samples.   Batch-effect correction was performed using ComBat. 23  A log 2  transformation was applied to reduce heteroscedasticity and normalize results. Quantile normalization was performed to reduce between-sample variability. 24  To increase confidence for selection of discriminating metabolites, data were filtered based on missing value criteria and only those features present in at least 80% of either cases or controls and present in at least 50% of all samples were included in downstream statistical analyses. Feature Selection and Annotation   As is common practice when using machine learning methods, the cases and controls were randomly divided into training and test sets containing 70% and 30% of samples, respectively. 25  The training set included 70 NVAMD patients and 134 controls, while the test set included 30 NVAMD patients and 58 controls. Nested feature selection was performed on the training set using linear models for microarray data (LIMMA), variable importance for projection (VIP) based on partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), support vector machine recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE), and random forest, incorporated in the R packages CMA and mixOmics. 26  Using the  GenerateLearningsets  function in the CMA package, the training set was randomly split into learning sets and validation sets 100 times, such that, for each iteration, the proportion of cases and controls was the same as for the whole data set. The  GeneSelection  function in the CMA package was used to perform feature selection in each learning set. 26  To allow for identification of the most robust features and reduce the risk of selecting noisy features, the final set of discriminating features included those selected in at least 70% of learning sets by one or more of the feature selection methods. 27   Following nested feature selection, the fold change between NVAMD patients and controls was calculated for each discriminating feature. The features were annotated using the R package xMSannotator, which uses a multilevel clustering procedure based on intensity across all samples, retention time, mass defect, and isotope/adduct patterns. 28  Additionally, xMSannotator uses metabolic pathway associations to assign confidence levels for database matches. Confidence levels range from zero to three, designating annotations from no to high confidence, which reduces the risk of false annotations and allows prioritization of computationally derived annotations for further experimental evaluation and confirmation. 28 Pathway Analysis and Hierarchical Cluster Analysis   The discriminating features were used to perform pathway analysis via Mummichog 2.0 (available in the public domain at  http://mummichog.org/ ), a program that combines metabolite identification and metabolic pathway/network analysis. 29 , 30  Pathways with an overlap size of four or greater were evaluated further by ion dissociation mass spectrometry. Using the  hclust()  function in R, 2-way hierarchical cluster analysis was performed to visualize the relationship between discriminating metabolite values and case-control status. Ion Dissociation Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)   Ion dissociation mass spectrometry was performed for representative discriminating metabolites detected in the study samples. Samples were analyzed using a Thermo LTQ Velos Orbitrap high-resolution (60,000 mass resolution) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Diego, CA, USA) operated in positive ion mode with 10-minute C18 column chromatography and standard source conditions used for the untargeted metabolic profiling. Before analysis, plasma proteins were precipitated using acetonitrile (2:1 vol/vol) and allowed to equilibrate for 30 minutes. Collision-induced ion dissociation was accomplished using high purity N 2  at a normalized collision energy of 35%. The tandem mass spectrometry data were processed using the  xcmsFragments  function in XCMS, 31 – 33  and the experimental spectra were compared with in-silico fragmentation using MetFrag. 34 Classification Accuracy Evaluation   The  classification()  function in the R package CMA was used to test the classification performance of the discriminating features using the support vector machine (SVM) classifier. 26  Using the training set, the SVM hyperparameters were selected by applying the  tune()  function in the CMA package. The  evaluation()  function was used to assess the classification accuracy based on the mean accuracy across the validation sets and the overall accuracy in the test set, using area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) criteria. Additionally, balanced accuracy rate (BAR) was calculated, where  BAR  = ( C NVAMD  +  C control )/2,  C NVAMD  is the number of correctly classified subjects in the NVAMD group, and  C control  is the number of correctly classified subjects in the control group. Statistical Analysis   Descriptive statistics for demographic and clinical variables were calculated for the entire study population. Comparisons between NVAMD patients and controls were made using a 2-tailed  t -test for continuous data (age and BMI) and a χ 2  test for categorical data (sex, smoking status, diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia). Using these same tests, we compared demographic, environmental, and clinical variables between the NVAMD patients from Cluster 1 and NVAMD patients from all other clusters identified in the hierarchical cluster analysis to determine if these variables differed between these two groups.   To test for association between discriminating features and age and sex, we performed separate linear regressions for each feature, including age and sex in the regression model. A Bonferroni correction for multiple testing was performed to obtain an adjusted significance threshold. Results   The study population consisted of 292 patients, including 100 NVAMD patients and 192 controls. Demographic variables, environmental exposures, and comorbid medical conditions were compared between NVAMD patients and controls ( Table 1 ). While NVAMD patients were older than controls, there were no significant associations between NVAMD and sex, BMI, smoking status, diabetes, hypertension, or hyperlipidemia in this population.   Table 1.   Study Population Characteristics     Open in a new tab Mass spectral data from LC-MS analysis of the 292 samples yielded 18,881 ions (defined by  m/z  and RT), each with an associated ion intensity. After data preprocessing and filtering based on missing values, 10,917 features were used for further analyses. The study population was divided into training and test sets. The training set was used to identify potential discriminating metabolites, and the test set was used to assess the generalizability of the results and determine how well those metabolites are able to differentiate between NVAMD patients and controls in an independent set of samples. Nested feature selection was performed on the training set with the 10,917 features, and a group of 159 metabolic features that discriminate NVAMD patients from controls was identified ( Supplemental Table S1 ). Of these discriminating features, 110 were increased and 49 were decreased in the plasma of NVAMD patients compared to controls.   Age and sex can be associated with metabolite levels. 35  To determine if these factors affected plasma levels of the discriminating features in this study, separate linear regressions were performed for each of the 159 metabolites, including age and sex as covariates. After correction for multiple testing, neither age nor sex was associated with levels of any of these metabolites ( Supplementary Table S1 ).   The 159 discriminating features were annotated using xMSannotator. Of these metabolites, 39 were annotated with medium or high confidence ( Table 2 ). Among these, multiple features were annotated to acylcarnitines, bile acids, phospholipids, lysophospholipids, and amino acids. To investigate further, we performed pathway analysis with Mummichog 2.0. This analysis showed that carnitine shuttle pathway metabolites ( P  = 0.0001; overlap size, 6 of 27) and bile acid biosynthesis pathway metabolites ( P  = 0.013; overlap size, 3 of 22) were overrepresented among the 159 discriminating features. After adjusting for multiple comparisons using Bonferroni correction, the carnitine shuttle pathway remained significant, suggesting that this pathway is altered in NVAMD patients.   Table 2.   Discriminating Features Annotated With Confidence     Open in a new tab Given that pathway analysis identified the carnitine shuttle, and that multiple discriminating features were putatively annotated to carnitines by xMSannotator, we performed LC-MS/MS to confirm the molecular identity of the six metabolites associated with the carnitine shuttle pathway. LC-MS/MS analysis supported the identity of five of these features as acylcarnitine intermediates ( Table 3 ). As measured in the untargeted LC-MS, plasma levels of these long-chain acylcarnitines were significantly increased between 1.7 and 2.2-fold in NVAMD patients compared to controls ( Table 3 ;  Fig. 1 ).   Table 3.   Features of the Carnitine Shuttle Pathway Verified by LC-MS/MS     Open in a new tab Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Plasma levels of multiple long-chain acylcarnitines are increased in NVAMD patients. Five long-chain acylcarnitines identified in the training set via untargeted metabolomics and confirmed with LC-MS/MS are significantly increased in NVAMD patients (n = 70) compared to controls (n = 134). Hierarchical clustering was performed using the training set to visualize how well the 159 discriminating features differentiate NVAMD patients from controls. The results demonstrated separation of the 204 individuals of the training set into 11 clusters ( Fig. 2 ). Of the 70 NVAMD patients, 36 (51.4%) clustered tightly together in Cluster 1, which also included eight controls, indicating that these patients share a similar metabolic profile in the context of the 159 discriminating features. In contrast, the remaining 34 NVAMD patients were distributed across five other clusters, each including a mixture of cases and controls. The remaining five clusters included only controls. To ensure that the clustering of the NVAMD patients was not due to differences in demographic or clinical variables, we compared these variables between NVAMD patients from Cluster 1 and the NVAMD patients from all other clusters. The tightly clustered NVAMD patients from Cluster 1 and the remaining NVAMD patients did not differ by any demographic, environmental, or clinical variables ( Supplementary Table S2 ), indicating that the clustering of NVAMD patients is not due to any of these variables.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Two-way hierarchical cluster analysis of the 159 discriminating features and NVAMD patients and non-AMD controls. Each column represents an individual patient's metabolic profile based on the 159 features identified by nested feature selection. The cluster analysis includes only those NVAMD patients (red) and controls (green) from the training set. Cluster 1 is indicated by the black box. We evaluated the ability of the 159 metabolic features identified using the training set to accurately discriminate NVAMD patients and controls in the test set. Using the SVM classifier, the 159 features produced a 10-fold cross-validation balanced accuracy rate of 96.1% in the training set and a balanced accuracy rate of 75.6% along with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.83 in the test set. Discussion   This large metabolome-wide association study identified a set of 159 metabolites that partially discriminated between NVAMD patients and controls in our cohort. Annotation of the discriminating features using computational methods followed by LC-MS/MS demonstrated differences in levels of multiple long-chain acylcarnitines. Further evaluation of the features using pathway analysis revealed that the carnitine shuttle pathway was significantly altered in NVAMD patients. Additionally, hierarchical cluster analysis revealed the potential for clinically indistinguishable NVAMD patients to be classified into metabolically distinct subgroups based on levels of discriminating features.   Evidence suggests that lipid metabolism is a key factor in the pathogenesis of AMD. Genes involved in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism pathways have been associated with AMD, 4 , 36  and previous AMD metabolomics studies have pointed to altered lipid metabolism. 9 , 10  In our study, multiple long-chain acylcarnitines from the carnitine shuttle pathway were increased in NVAMD patients compared to controls. Among these long-chain acylcarnitines was L-palmitoylcarnitine which was reported to be altered in a small cohort of Chinese NVAMD patients compared to a non-AMD control group. 11  The carnitine shuttle pathway is responsible for transporting long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondria for subsequent catabolism via β-oxidation, in a process that requires acyl-CoA and results in the esterification of L-carnitine to form acylcarnitine derivatives. 37  Additionally, in a gene-based pathway analysis comparing exome sequence results in NVAMD patients to non-AMD controls, Sardell et al. 38  identified enrichment of variants in the biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids pathways. Thus, multiple lines of evidence suggest that fatty acid metabolism may be involved in NVAMD pathogenesis.   Increased plasma levels of long-chain acylcarnitines have been reported in other conditions, including cardiovascular disease, 39  heart failure, 40  and type 2 diabetes. 41  Each condition has risk factors that also have been associated with AMD (e.g., hypertension, hyperlipidemia) suggesting common mechanisms could be contributing to these diseases. It is possible that perturbation of the carnitine shuttle leads to compromised mitochondrial function, which could decrease cellular capacity to handle reactive oxygen species, resulting in increased cellular dysfunction and cell death. Targeted investigations of carnitine shuttle enzymes and metabolites are necessary to determine how the alterations in long-chain acylcarnitines might contribute to NVAMD pathogenesis.   We also observed that some metabolic features with matches to taurine-conjugated bile acids were increased in NVAMD patients compared to controls. The bile acid biosynthesis pathway was identified in the pathway analysis, but was not significant after correction for multiple testing. In our previous AMD metabolomics study, we identified the bile acid biosynthesis pathway as altered in NVAMD patients. 8  The features identified in that study were matched to glycine-conjugated bile acids and were decreased in NVAMD patients. Taken together, the data from these two studies suggest that bile acids are altered in NVAMD. Additional validation studies are necessary to confirm these findings, and molecular investigations are essential to determine the role of bile acids in disease pathogenesis.   The hierarchical cluster analysis revealed distinct metabolic profiles among NVAMD patients. Just over half of the NVAMD patients in the training set exhibited similar metabolic profiles and were assigned to a single cluster that included only eight control samples. No clear metabolic relationship was identified among th