>Materials and methods   The workflow and installation instructions are accessible from the GitHub repository  https://github.com/braungeorg/AutomatedTargetScreening . An example environment with scripts, target lists, minified versions of the raw data, and results is accessible on Zenodo via 10.5281/zenodo.10047377. TraceFinder (version 5.1) was used as a reference for both peak annotation comparison and quantification, since it is a fully supervised method. MZmine (version 2.51) was used for comparing the peak annotation performance of ATS to a sophisticated (semi-)automated analysis workflow. MZmine 2.51 was used in this comparison, although a newer version MZmine 3 has been launched during the preparation of the present study. As MZmine 3 still uses the same peak detection algorithms, we consider that the results using the older version are comparable [ 15 ].   Dataset   The samples used in this study were a subset of eight samples (sites A–H) from a study on micropollutants in surface water in Germany, which were filtered over 1.6 µm glass fiber filters to obtain an aqueous phase of freely dissolved and dissolved organic carbon-bound chemicals, and a filter residue that contains all particle-bound chemicals. Organic contaminants were extracted from the aqueous phase using solid-phase extraction (SPE) and from suspended particles using pressurized liquid extraction (PLE). The SPE extracts and PLE extracts were measured with LC-HRMS and GC-HRMS, respectively. The ionization techniques were electrospray ionization (ESI) in both positive and negative modes for LC (LC-ESIpos and LC-ESIneg), as well as electron ionization (EI) for GC (GC-EI). Instrumental analysis for both LC- and GC-HRMS was performed as published by Niu et al. [ 16 ]. The details regarding sample extraction and settings of TraceFinder and MZmine can be accessed from Text  S1  to Text  S3  in Supporting Information  S1 . The Thermo .raw data files were converted to centroided .mzML using ProteoWizard’s MsConvert tool [ 17 ]. Minified versions of the .mzML files of these samples are included in the example files of the R package. These minified versions were created using the RaMS R package (version 1.3.0) [ 18 ] and covered only the  m/z  of very few analytes for LC-ESIpos and GC-EI for demonstration purposes.   The list of all analyzed compounds and their IDs and mode of analysis as well as internal standards are accessible from Supporting Information  S2 , Tables  S2 - 1  and  S2 - 2 . Workflow   The ATS R package (R version 4.1.3) [ 19 ] can be accessed and installed from GitHub. Installation instructions and details regarding dependencies and required files as well as the setup of the working environment, samples, and variables are included in respective README files in the GitHub repository. An overview with descriptions and impact of the user-defined ATS analysis parameters is also provided in Supporting Information  S2 , Table  S2 - 3 . The workflow consists of six main steps as visualized in Fig.  1 . Within the R package, the workflow is split into five main functions. After setting up the working environment, the functions can be called individually, or ran as a batch in the provided Automated_Target_Sreenning_workflow.R script. All functions use extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) and respective symbolic aggregate approximation (SAX) sequences generated using the procedure described in the following. For more detailed information, see Supporting Information  S1 , Figure  S1 - 1 .   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Main functions and steps of the ATS workflow.  A  For each function working with raw data, EICs are generated per  m/z  of interest and processed for further analysis.  B  A global shift for the whole batch is calculated based on internal standards.  C  A peak list is generated using external standards and confirmation ions.  D  In-sample shifts are considered by checking drifts of internal standards as well as intensity-dependent shifts of calibrations.  E  Each sample is analyzed for valid peaks considering shifts and peak shapes of references.  F  Quantitative analysis to obtain metrics like variability of internal standard intensity and recovery or concentrations based on external standards Function A: generation of EICs, overall peak identification, and integration   This function is used as a data import function in all raw data handling functions of the workflow. EICs are generated using the R packages rawrr (version 1.2.0) [ 20 ] for .raw and RaMS (version 1.3.0) [ 18 ] for .mzML files. A smoothed chromatogram is generated, but only used to increase data density for some of the shape-dependent functions. Quantitative functions such as the calculation of peak heights and areas use the measured intensity values of the EIC without any smoothing. Integrated peak areas are calculated via the trapezoidal rule. The full EIC is described as a symbolic aggregate approximation (SAX) sequence [ 21 ,  22 ] using the seewave package (version 2.2.0) [ 23 ] and a selectable alphabet size, which is used to identify and define peaks and their shapes.   An EIC with a broader retention time window is used as a so-called background EIC. This background EIC is used to define the baseline and background noise of the respective narrower EIC of the analyte within a given sample. The timeframe of the background EIC is based on the sample search window and extended by a user-defined factor, in our study 1.5. The initial search window is set by the user and gets trimmed to the reference-guided area of interest for the respective analytes after peak annotation. The use of an extended EIC for background calculation is necessary to avoid artificially elevated baseline and background values, e.g., due to peak fronting or tailing, or if the EIC consists mainly of the analyte peak after trimming to the area of interest, or if co-eluting nearby peaks occur. For baseline calculation in each EIC, shapes like random scatters or highly fluctuating intensities (so-called zigzag patterns) are detected to define which quantiles of the intensities are used. Zigzag is defined as intensity patterns of contiguous sequences of alternating high and close to baseline intensities. Usually, the baseline is defined as the 25% intensity quantile. For more challenging EICs with high-intensity fluctuation, ATS needs to be stricter in defining the baseline values to avoid integrating noise. To detect such noisy EICs, ATS checks several thresholds, including the following: (A) portion of total zigzag patterns of the EIC must be below 25% (defined as zigzag_trigger_threshold, see Table  S2 - 3 ), (B) the root mean squared error of the background must be below 10%, (C) the ratio of maximum intensity divided by the 25% intensity quantile must be >3 (defined as minimum_background_ratio, see Table  S2 - 3 ). If one of these criteria is not met, a higher intensity quantile is used to define the elevated baseline due to higher interferences. A quantile threshold of 80% was deemed appropriate in our case study. However, the respective quantiles can be adjusted by the user via the parameters normal_background_quantile and higher_background_quantile (see Table  S2 - 3 ). The noise is defined as the standard deviation of all baseline-defining intensities. A limit of baseline + 3× noise is used as the in-sample limit of detection (LOD) and baseline + 10× noise as the in-sample limit of quantification (LOQ). These in-sample LOD and LOQ are intensity-based and do not represent the final quantitative LOD or LOQ of the analytes, but aim to improve confident peak annotation.   For peak identification, a local maxima algorithm is used. In brief, the script starts with the highest intensity in a defined retention time window. For each maximum, it follows decreasing intensities until the first non-decreasing intensity value is reached. Based on the data density, which is defined as data points within 0.1 min, a maximum number of non-decreasing intensity values is defined (five times the data density in our study). A peak-related decrease in intensity is considered as continued if within this number of data points a decrease of intensity greater than a defined threshold (>40% in our study) occurs relative to the last intensity value that has been assigned to the peak. If this is not the case, a steady intensity plateau is assumed, and the end of the peak is set at the start of the plateau. Further, an increase of intensity greater than another defined threshold relative to the last assigned intensity (>40% in our study) will trigger another counting of data points. This counting aims to allow small bumps or non-Gaussian deformities to occur within one peak as long as the decrease in intensity continues afterwards. If the increase is however continued for more than a fourth of the data density, the algorithm will be terminated assuming the start of another peak. All these thresholds and factors (intensity_factor_decrease, intensity_factor_increase, density_factor) can be selected by the user (see Table  S2 - 3 ).   This is repeated for all local maxima within the retention time window. To allow the splitting of merged or intersected peaks, likely cutoffs, defined as the points of contact of the edges of two local maxima, are used as enforced split points. The function also adjusts the respective SAX sequence of the EIC by adjusting the letters to the lowest letter “a” at the start and end retention time of a peak, or at identified necessary split points. Function B: calculation of global shift   For the global shift analysis, all listed internal standards (IS) are analyzed and the shifts within all IS-containing samples are calculated. It is assumed that the mean of these shifts represents the global shift, i.e., a probable shift that affects all analytes and is system-dependent, for example, due to the cutting of GC columns. The largest shift is then used as the retention time window to screen for peaks, trying to include all possible scenarios of highly shifted and robust peaks. By default, the retention time window is at least 0.5 min in LC analyses and 0.1 min in GC analyses. Shifts are calculated in relation to the given retention time in the target list of choice. Function C: peak list annotation and calculation of intensity-dependent shifts   Within the defined retention time window, all peaks with suitable peak characteristics are listed. Per reference standard, a consensus peak with unified peak characteristics is generated. If defined for an analyte, confirming ions are compared to the quantified ion and used for confirmation and peak selection. If references are used at different concentrations (i.e., calibrations), it is checked whether higher concentrations tend to elute earlier, indicating overload of the column and an intensity-dependent shift. A simple linear regression of intensity and theoretical concentration and a check for unspecific peaks around the aimed retention time are used to reduce falsely identified intensity-dependent peak shifts. Therefore, it is strongly recommended to include a sample with internal standards only and without any quantified reference compounds to identify unspecific and potentially interfering peaks. Besides overload of the system, this step also accounts for changes in the peak shapes of analytes at lower concentrations, which are more likely to be found in samples due to co-elution of other chemicals and matrix effects. Function D: internal standard analysis   The shift of the internal standards is calculated for each sample. This shift assumes that compounds are assigned to standards which are likely affected by the same matrix effects like overloads or changes in ionization efficiency, for example, because they are structurally related or at least share similar retention times. Hence, individual shifts of the respective IS indicate a likely shift of the analyte within the given sample(s). If later a valid peak is identified in a sample without shift correction and exactly at the expected retention time, this consideration of the calculated IS-dependent shift will be ignored by the algorithm (assuming a distinct selection of likely peaks using high-resolution instruments). This is relevant if the assigned internal standard is not sharing the same functional groups or physicochemical properties of the analyte. Function E: sample analysis   The target screening function can be considered as the main function and uses the retention time derived from the peak list annotation and considers all possible intensity-dependent and/or IS-dependent shifts to define the screening window for the analyte in each sample. Peaks are allowed to have non-optimal shapes such as highly fluctuating intensity patterns (zigzag) or non-Gaussian forms if significant intensities (a priori set range of intensities) occur closely to the expected retention times. Confirming ions are screened separately for their presence and are tested if a detection can be expected. The ratio of quantified ion to confirming ion is used and assumed to be stable with an allowed intensity deviation of 20%. If the expected intensity of the confirming ion exceeds the calculated in-sample LOD, a peak must be found for the confirming ion. If shifts are too far off (defined by pre-defined retention time tolerances and allowed calculated shifts), the peak shapes differ strongly (identified by using a calculated maximum of the MINDIST function to compare SAX sequences of peaks and EICs [ 21 ]), the peak consists of very few data points (pre-defined by the user, default is <=7), or an expected confirming ion is missing; the area is integrated but tagged as “CHECK”. These “CHECK” cases are considered negative in a fully unsupervised mode, but can be manually re-evaluated. These “CHECK” cases are similar to the peak status “ESTIMATED” in MZmine. Function F: quantification of samples   For quantification, samples have to be grouped into solvent blanks, reference standards, and samples. The reference standards can have the same concentration to be used for recovery calculations, or represent a calibration. Additionally, specific groups of samples such as matrix-matched quality control standards or standards containing references for qualitative peak annotation can be defined. The respective name tags for files and variables are user-defined as instructed on the GitHub repository. The analysis can be performed using responses in the form of peak areas or heights.   First, solvent blanks are screened for responses of analytes. If responses are found in more than one-third of all solvent blanks, the mean response is subtracted from all samples, whereby a system-dependent background is assumed. Only samples that exceed this mean of blanks more than three times are regarded as valid peaks and included for further analyses; otherwise, they are tagged “masked by background.”   If solvent-based reference standards are used but potential matrix effects need to be considered, one can prepare matrix-matched samples spiked with the references and tag those samples as matrix samples. These matrix samples are compared to their solvent-matched counterparts and a matrix correction of the respective analytes is performed for all samples.   If only references with a constant concentration are used, e.g., for calculating recoveries, they are tested for deviation by calculating the interquartile range (IQR) of all references within the batch and checked for outliers. The IQR is chosen due to the lower influence of outliers. If the response of a reference control is outside the calculated accepted intervals, the respective samples are removed from further calculations.   Quantification is performed when the calibration samples are included. Here, a simple linear regression is used in six variants: (1) through origin without weights, (2) through origin with weights = ×, (3) through origin with weights = 1/×, (4) no restrictions, (5) no restrictions with weights = ×, (6) no restrictions with weights = 1/×. The six models were included to increase the likelihood of a good fit for a more diverse set of data with possibly varying trends and patterns. This is in particular relevant in the process of the autotrimming of imperfect linear calibration curves, for example, by removing bent regression trends or constant background signals, which cover responses at low concentrations. The regressions are autonomously optimized against the coefficient of determination (which needs to be at least a pre-defined minimum, default is 0.95) and the median error of quantification (which should be lower than a pre-defined value, default is < 30%). The error for quantification was calculated according to Eq. ( 1 ).     Error quantififcation ( % ) = median C actual - C predicted C actual * 100   1     Concentration value(s) with the highest leverage are identified using Cook’s distance. Such high-leverage concentrations are removed if their exclusion results in a decrease in the error of quantification and an increase in the coefficient of determination. This step is repeated as long as the optimization parameters improve and the calibration curve consists of enough data points (default at least 4). Cutoffs were defined for the  y -axis (lowest concentration suitable for quantification, “limit of quantification”) and the  x -axis (lowest response ratio within the linear range). Hence, the regressions were automatically trimmed to a suitable linear range for quantification. The final regression and concentration range is selected out of all variants which meet the pre-defined criteria by going from highest to lowest impact: (1) lowest error of quantification as calculated by Eqs. ( 1 ), ( 2 ) highest coverage of the concentration range, (3) highest coefficient of determination.   Per analyte, the ratio of the response ratios from quantified samples and the median response ratio of all valid reference samples which translates to the 100% equivalent are used to calculate the recovery.   For each of the targeted compounds, the output consists of the responses of all samples, the response ratios of all samples, the quantified concentrations of all samples, the quantified values of all samples partially excluded (masked by background, above or below calibration, invalid references, “CHECK” etc.), the consensus peak list of all analytes, and apex retention times of all sample-analyte pairs. Further, a heatmap consisting of TRUE/FALSE/masked by background cases serving as a qualitative overview is also generated. Workflow comparison   Peak annotation   Compounds were selected for peak annotation performance comparison if they had at least one annotated response in one of the three evaluation workflows TraceFinder, ATS, or MZmine. Hence, the total number  n  of peaks for all methods per mode of analysis consisted of the number of selected chemicals times the number of all samples. The peak annotation was compared by calculating the fractions of false positives (FP), false negatives (FN), true positives (TP), and true negatives (TN) of all observations  n  for MZmine and ATS compared to the manual evaluation in TraceFinder. For ATS, both ATS_mzML and ATS_raw were used for comparison. Only features with the “DETECTED” peak status were included in MZmine. For evaluation, the parameters sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy were calculated according to Eqs. ( 2 )–( 4 ) per mode of analysis (LC-ESIpos, LC-ESIneg, GC-EI).     Sensitivity = TP TP + FN   2       Specificity = TN TN + FP   3       A ccuracy = TN + TP TN + FP + TP + FN = TN + TP n   4   Quantification accuracy   The accuracy of quantified results was checked by comparing pairs of valid calibrations, determined by having a coefficient of determination ( R 2 ) > 0.95 and an error of quantification <20%. The data was visualized as a Bland-Altman plot using an accepted deviation of 1.96 .  times the standard deviation. Here, the data is compared as a result of method A (e.g., TraceFinder) and a result of method B (e.g., ATS), and respective differences are plotted against the mean of the data pairs. This visualization enables a direct comparison of the results generated by different methods and the identification of systematic errors and trends. A mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) was calculated according to Eq. ( 5 ). Here, the concentrations per analyte i from TraceFinder (C i,TF ) and ATS (C i,ATS ) for all  n  analytes were used.     MAPE ( % ) = ∑ n i C i , TF - C i , ATS C i , TF * 100 n   5     These analyses were performed for each instrument mode (LC-ESIpos, LC-ESIneg, GC-EI). Results   The lists of all detected peaks per workflow as well as quantified concentrations for the 680 analyzed compounds are listed in Supporting Information  S2 , Text  S5 , Tables  S2 - 4  and  S2 - 5 . Further, a summary of the number of detected compounds per mode of analysis and sampling site is given in Supporting Information  S1 , Table  S1 - 3 . The highest number of chemicals was identified in TF while ATS and MZmine have a lower number but similar patterns of detected chemicals. LC-ESIpos was the instrument mode which had the most detects but also the highest number of target analytes (see Supporting Information  S2 , Table  S2 - 1 ). A heatmap of the concentrations of 159 chemicals from ATS and TF (Supporting Information  S1 , Figure  S1 - 2 ) shows that ATS has a lower overall detection density compared to TF, but similar patterns in detected chemicals for the samples. For example, the sampling sites A and H can be identified in both analyses as the sites with the most detected chemicals and are accordingly the most polluted. The average runtime of ATS can be summarized as 0.3 min per analyte and 2.3 min per sample file (see Table  S1 - 4 ).   Peak annotation   The comparison of the peak annotation (see Supporting Information  S2 , Table  S2 - 4 ) via ATS_raw, ATS_mzML, and MZmine with selected key figures is listed in Table  1 . TF was used as a reference. For the MZmine analysis of the GC dataset, two sets of retention times were used, (i) a list with retention times as used by ATS with shifts in the range of