>MATERIALS AND METHODS   Modularization of Data Processing Tools   msCompare was designed to interconnect different modules of independent open source LC-MS data analysis programs. We first divided all programs into two main modules: feature detection/quantification and feature alignment/matching. These two modules were implemented by writing wrappers around the data processing tools of OpenMS (version 1.2 and 1.5 for feature detection/quantification and version 1.5 for alignment/matching) ( 37 ,  51 – 53 ) and SuperHirn (version 0.05) ( 38 ), which execute the processing steps of the program for either feature detection/quantification or feature alignment/matching. MZmine (version 0.6) ( 36 ,  54 ,  55 ) can be only accessed via a graphical user interface. For that reason we implemented MZmine in msCompare by writing a program that encapsulates MZmine as a Java library. Additionally, a wrapper was written around our in-house feature alignment/matching tool based on the Warp2D algorithm ( 27 ) and around a feature detection/quantification module (N-M rules) that we implemented based on the approach published by Radulovic  et al.  ( 48 ). Two XML-based data formats were developed: one is the FeatureLists format, which stores the feature detection/quantification results, and the other is the FeatureMatrix format, which stores the resulting quantitative matrix obtained after feature alignment/matching. The formats are described in detail in the following section and were developed to enable bidirectional conversion between the different internal data formats of the various tools.   We have implemented additional modules to extend the functionality of msCompare to perform filtering of the feature list by setting criteria for feature properties ( e.g.  deleting features with extreme width in the retention time and/or mass to charge ratio dimensions), to export feature lists or feature matrices into a tab-delimited or APML format, or to perform conversions between the different feature list formats. The latter module has the additional benefit of allowing the visualization of any feature list in the TOPPView program ( 53 ), which is part of the OpenMS TOPP framework, independently of the used feature detection/quantification module. msCompare uses mzXML ( 56 ) as input format, but mzData ( 57 ) and mzML ( 58 ) data formats are also supported through the use of the file converter of OpenMS. Data Integration   Our data format for the feature list is generic and allows storage of the complete information of the feature lists provided by all programs integrated in msCompare ( supplementary Section 1.1 ). The implementation does not provide a link between the corresponding feature attributes with different names ( e.g.  attribute names used for feature quantity may be feature intensity, feature area, or feature volume) or between the same attributes having different units, such as retention time attributes in minutes or seconds, nor does it provide a solution for absent feature attributes. Such links are, however, necessary for the conversion between different feature list formats. To solve the conversion problem, we developed a set of rules described in XML format called FeatureConversion XML, which are used at runtime to perform the conversion between the different feature attributes. Because we had four feature detection/quantification and four feature alignment/matching modules, we describe the conversion rules between all possible scenarios of format conversion (16 rules in total). This approach facilitates the integration of new modules, because, by defining a new set of conversion rules in XML, msCompare is able to convert data between one of the already integrated modules and the newly added module. We have implemented msCompare in a way that conversion to the FeatureList XML format from the internal format of the feature quantification module is performed as the last step. The first step of all feature alignment/matching modules is therefore the conversion from the FeatureList XML format to the feature list format used by the integrated program.   APML is the only currently available format for storing processed quantitative LC-MS proteomics data at the feature list and matched feature matrix levels. We have decided to design a different format, because it is not possible to store all information obtained with the different integrated modules in the APML format. APML format has a predefined set of feature properties, and it contains a number of feature properties that are optional. Accordingly, we do not provide an import module for feature list in APML format. However, to facilitate integration of msCompare with other programs supporting the APML format (for example the statistical modules in Corra), we designed two export functions: one to export feature lists and the other to export feature matrices in APML format. Implementation of msCompare in Galaxy   To provide an easy-to-use web-based interface for scientists with limited bioinformatics expertise, we implemented msCompare in the Galaxy processing framework ( 49 ,  50 ). Galaxy offers relatively simple integration for command line tools. Command line tools require definition of a “tool XML config file,” which describes the command line usage, input and output formats, and input parameters. Implementation of various data processing modules of msCompare in Galaxy was therefore relatively simple because all modules can be run from the command line. One particularly useful property of Galaxy is that it keeps track of user histories including the data, parameter settings, and data processing tasks. The history stores the input, output, and parameter settings of the executed data processing tasks, which can be reused for future data processing. In addition, processing tasks stored in the history can be used to build data processing workflows. Workflows may also be built using an integrated visual workflow editor. Histories (data and parameters) and workflows can be shared with other users, facilitating collaboration between multiple users in large scientific projects. Galaxy is able to execute processing tasks either on a local computer or on a computer cluster, thus providing a high throughput data processing and analysis environment. All hardware-related implementation details are handled by the Galaxy framework and thus hidden from the user. Integrating New Modules in msCompare   The current version of msCompare supports four different feature detection/quantification and four different feature alignment/matching modules. To add new modules to the msCompare framework, it is necessary to write parsers to make the output and/or input formats compatible with either the FeatureList and/or FeatureMatrix XML format of msCompare. The next step is to define the conversion rules between the feature attributes that are used by the new module and the feature attributes that are used by the already integrated modules. This can be a challenging task when the number of modules increases. To facilitate this task, we developed a stand-alone FeatureMatcher Java tool. Using FeatureMatcher, a user can define conversion rules for the new feature list with respect to an already existing feature list format. FeatureMatcher automatically adds all other conversions rules as needed for all other integrated feature list formats. The last step in module integration is adding the module to the galaxy framework by writing the tool XML config file as mentioned in the previous section. Scoring Module   The accurate comparison and assessment of workflow performance requires knowledge of the “ground truth,”  i.e.  the exact molecular composition of the samples and the amount of each compound. In complex biological samples it is, however, not possible to know the exact quantitative and qualitative molecular composition. It is thus necessary to add (“spike”) known compounds at defined levels to biological samples to define the “ground truth” for the added compounds. To evaluate the capacity of a given workflow to detect and quantify correctly, spiking must be done at two different concentration levels or more and the concentration difference must be larger than the measurement error of the analytical system. It is also important that the biological matrix has the same molecular composition and concentration for the different spiking levels.   Because the number of detected and quantified features is not constant across workflows, classical binary statistical tests do not apply, leading us to develop a novel figure of merit to measure performance based on a score of the ranked spiked features rather than a match of measured feature strengths to “ground truth” values ( Equation 1 ). This score is based on the number of detected features that correspond to spiked peptides and their relative rank among the most discriminating features. The scoring module requires a data set in which a sample with an unknown composition is spiked at different concentration levels with peptides (or other compounds) that can be assigned based on their known mass to charge ratios and retention times. The detected features are sorted according to decreasing  t  values in the matched feature matrix, and the score is calculated using  Equation 1 ,       where  n  is the number of all features in a data set,  NSF  (number of non-spike-related features) is the number of features occurring between rank 1 and index  i  in the matched feature matrix that are not related to the spiked standard compounds, and  p  and  x  are constants determining the degree of score attenuation for non-spike-related features among the most discriminating features. A decoy approach is applied to calculate a score corresponding to random distribution of the detected spiked peptide-related features in the complete feature list, and the decoy score is subtracted from the score obtained for a particular pipeline. The random distribution of features related to spiked peptides in the feature lists is obtained by randomly reshuffling the order of all features in the quantitative matched feature matrix. This decoy score provides the background value for a given data processing result and corrects for differences in the number of all detected features ( n ) and in the number of identified spiked peptide-related features.   Fig. 2  gives two examples to demonstrate the scoring mechanism using several values for  p  and  x . By decreasing the values for  p , one increases the penalty after each non-spike-related feature that occurs in the rank list. In that case, our scoring method distinguishes clearly between feature lists containing few or many non-spike-related features among the most discriminating features. The value of  x  defines the degree to which non-spike-related features affect the further increase in score for the less discriminatory spike-related features. When  x  is large ( x  is close to 1), the score attenuation for each additional spike-related feature following an  NSF  is large, and for small  x  values ( x  is close to 0), this effect is small.  Supplemental Fig. S1  summarizes the main steps of the scoring mechanism starting with sorting features according to their  t  value, followed by assigning features to spiked standard compounds and the final application of  Equation 1 .   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Examples showing the operational mechanism of the scoring function on four different quantitative matched feature matrices per parameter choice.   Black dots  (●) represent spike-related features, whereas  white dots  (○) represent other features ( NSF  in  Equation 1 ).  Equation 1  contains two constants,  p  and  x , which influence the final scores. When  p  and  x  have stringent settings ( left panel ), the presence of  NSFs  in high rank positions of the matched feature matrix leads to a rapid decrease of the score for subsequent spike-related features. The value of  x  defines the degree to which non-spike-related features affect the score increase for less discriminatory spike-related features and has weaker influence on the score than  p  (see scores values for various  x  and  p  in  supplemental Fig. S6  in the supplementary material). Setting these parameters more leniently ( right panel ) allows for more  NSFs  with lower discriminatory ranks without penalizing subsequent standard features severely. For evaluation of different workflows, we used  p  = 5 and  x  = 1. To remove the dependence of the total number of detected features  n  from the score, we corrected the score using a decoy approach. The decoy approach includes subtraction of the score obtained for randomly reshuffled matched feature matrix/matrices from the score obtained with the real matched feature matrix/matrices sorted according to the  t  value. LC-MS Data Acquisition and Analysis     Collection of Urine Samples   50 midstream morning urine samples from 15 healthy females and 35 healthy males aged 26.9–72.9 years were obtained from the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at the University Medical Centre Groningen (Groningen, The Netherlands). A pooled urine sample was prepared by combining 200 μl from each sample, which served as biological matrix for all LC-MS analyses. Sample preparation was performed as previously described. The amount of urine injected into the LC-MS system was normalized to 50 nmol of creatinine. All of the subjects that participated in this study gave their oral and/or written informed consent. The study protocol was in agreement with local ethical standards and the Helsinki declaration of 1964, as revised in 2004. Preparation of Spiked Urine Samples   Urine samples were spiked with different volumes of a stock solution containing a tryptic digest of carbonic anhydrase (Sigma; C3934) plus seven synthetic peptides. 600 μl of carbonic anhydrase (CA) solution at 22 mg/ml in 50 mmol/liter NH 4 HCO 3  buffer at pH 7.8 were divided into six equal aliquots. Ten μl of 100 m m  DTT were added to each aliquot, and the solution was incubated at 50 °C for 30 min followed by the addition of 40 μl of 137.5 m m  iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for another 60 min. Reduced and alkylated CA was digested by adding 40 μl of 0.5 μg/μl sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI; V5111) and subsequent incubation at 37 °C overnight. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 10 μl of pure formic acid (FA). The excess of DTT and iodoacetamide was removed by solid phase extraction using a 100 mg Strata C-18 SPE column with the following protocol: the column was conditioned with 2 ml of methanol followed by one washing step with 2 ml of water. Each aliquot of digested CA was loaded on the SPE column, and the column was subsequently washed with 2 ml of 5% aq. methanol. Peptides were eluted with 1 ml of 80% aq. methanol. The eluate was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and redissolved in 200 μl of 30% ACN and 1% FA. Finally 500 μl of digested CA were mixed with 200 μl of a stock solution of the synthetic peptides resulting in a standard mixture stock solution with a calculated digested CA concentration of 240 μ m  and the following concentrations for the seven synthetic peptides: VYV, 83 μ m ; YGGFL, 57 μ m ; DRVYIHPF, 29 μ m ; YPFPGPI, 46 μ m ; YPFPG, 60 μ m ; GYYPT, 54 μ m ; and YGGWL, 57 μ m . Analysis of Spiked Urine Samples by Reversed Phase LC-MS   All of the LC-MS analyses were performed on an 1100 series capillary high performance liquid chromatography system equipped with a cooled autosampler (4 °C) and an SL ion trap mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). The samples were desalted on an Atlantis dC18 precolumn (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA; 2.1 × 20 mm, 3-μm particles, 10-nm pores) using 0.1% FA in 5% ACN at a flow rate of 50 μl/min for 16 min. Compounds were back-flushed from the precolumn onto a temperature-controlled (25 °C) Atlantis dC18 analytical column (1.0 × 150 mm, 3-μm particles, 30-nm pores) and separated over 90 min at a flow rate of 50 μl/min, during which the percentage of solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA in ultrapure H 2 O) was increased from 5.0 to 43.6% (eluent gradient of 0.43%/min). Settings of the electrospray ionization interface and the mass spectrometer were as follows: nebulization gas, 40.0 psi N 2 ; drying gas, 6.0 liters/min N 2 ; capillary temperature, 325 °C; capillary voltage, 3250 V; skimmer voltage, 25 V; capillary exit voltage, 90 V; octapole 1 voltage, 8.5 V; octapole 2 voltage, 4.0 V; octapole RF voltage, 175 V; lens 1 voltage, −5 V; lens 2 voltage, −64.6 V; trap drive, 67; scan speed, 5500  m / z  s −1 ; accumulation time, 50 ms (or 30,000 ions); and scan range, 100–1500  m / z . A Gaussian smoothing filter (width 0.15  m / z ) was applied for each mass spectrum; rolling average was disabled, resulting in a rate of ∼70 mass spectra/min. The spectra were saved in profile mode.   Following the gradient, both columns were washed with 85% B for 5 min and equilibrated with 5% B for 10 min prior to the next injection. Different volumes of the standard mixture (CA digest plus peptides) were injected on the precolumn prior to injection of the pooled urine sample to obtain the desired final concentrations.  Supplemental Table S1  provides the list of dilution factors with the corresponding concentrations expressed in terms of the practical lower limit of quantification (pLLOQ;  supplemental Section 1.2 ) for the respective peptides. The injection system was cleaned with 70% ACN after each injection and filled with 0.1% FA in 5% ACN. Mass spectrometry settings were optimized for detection of singly and doubly charged ions of DRVYIHPF without provoking upfront fragmentation. Raw data converted to mzXML format are available at  http://tinyurl.com/msCompareData . Data Analysis of Spiked Urine Samples   After the LC-MS analysis, the raw LC-MS profile data were exported in mzXML format using CompassXport v1.3.6. These data were then analyzed by all different workflow combinations (see  supplemental Section 1.3  for parameters and execution details), which lead to the construction of multiple matched feature matrices, each containing 10 LC-MS analyses at two spiking concentration levels (five LC-MS analyses for each level). We used the score module with the list of spike-related features ( supplemental Section 1.4 ) to calculate the scores for one feature matrix. The final scores for the high, medium, and low categories were obtained by summing the individual scores of several quantitative matched feature matrices (see  supplemental Table S2  for an overview of the feature matrices used to construct the three categories). Collection of CSF Samples   Porcine CSF was obtained from the Animal Sciences Group of Wageningen University (Division of Infectious Diseases, Lelystad, The Netherlands). CSF was collected from the cerebromedullary cistern of the subarachnoid space in the cervical region directly after killing the animal (by intravenous injection of T61® pentobarbital followed by exsanguination). The sample was collected under mild suction using a syringe with a 22-gauge needle. The CSF sample was centrifuged immediately after sampling (10 min at 1500 ×  g ). The total protein concentration was measured using the Micro BCA TM  Assay (Pierce), and the final concentration was 860 ng/μl. Preparation of Spiked CSF Samples   Digestion with trypsin was performed according to the following procedure: 200 μl of CSF and 200 μl of 0.1% RapiGest TM  (in 50 m m  ammonium bicarbonate) (Waters, Milford, MA) were added to a sample tube (Greiner Bio-One, Alphen aan den Rijn, The Netherlands; part 623201). The sample was reduced by adding 4 μl of 0.5  m  DTT followed by incubation at 60 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, the sample was alkylated with 20 μl of iodoacetamide (0.3  m ) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Eight μl of sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (1 μg/μl) was added to give a trypsin to protein ratio of ∼1:20 (w/w). The sample was incubated for ∼16 h at 37 °C under vortexing (450 rpm) in a thermomixer comfort (Eppendorf). Thereafter 40 μl of hydrochloric acid (0.5  m ) were added to stop the digestion followed by incubation for 30 min at 37 °C. The sample was centrifuged at 13,250 ×  g  for 10 min at 4 °C to remove the insoluble part of the hydrolyzed RapiGest TM . The spiking procedure was carried out according to the following protocol: 20 μl of CSF digest were mixed with 20 μl of a tryptic digest of horse hearth cytochrome  c  (Fluka; part 30396) at different concentrations (25, 5, 2.5, 0.5, 0.05, 0.025, and 0.005 fmol/μl). The samples at each spiking level were aliquoted in five tubes containing 8 μl each. Spiked, trypsin-digested CSF was injected five times at each spiking level (4 μl from individual vials) in a random order (amount of injected cytochrome  c , 50, 10, 5, 1, 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 fmol).  Supplemental Table S3  provides the list of dilution factors with the corresponding concentrations expressed in terms of the practical lower limit of quantification (pLLOQ; see  supplemental Section 1.5 ) for the respective peptides. Analysis of Spiked CSF Samples by Reversed Phase Chip-LC-MS   Peptides were separated on a reverse phase chip-LC (Protein ID chip 3; G4240–63001 SPQ110: Agilent Technologies; separating column, 150 mm × 75 μm Zorbax 300SB-C18, 5 μm; trap column, 160 nl of Zorbax 300SB-C18, 5 μm) coupled to a nano LC system (Agilent 1200) with a 40-μl injection loop. Ions were generated by ESI and transmitted to a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Agilent 6510). Instrumentation was operated using the MassHunter data acquisition software (version B.01.03; Build 1.3.157.0; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA).   For LC separation the following eluents were used: eluent A, ultra-pure water with 0.1% FA, and eluent B, acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. The samples were injected on the trap column at a flow rate of 3 μl/min (3% B). After 10 min, the sample was back flushed from the trap column and transferred to the analytical column at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, and the peptides were eluted using the following gradient: 95-min linear gradient from 3 to 70% B; 2-min linear gradient from 70 to 3% B, which was maintained for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The samples were analyzed in a random order with blanks and quality control samples (200 fmol of trypsin-digested cytochrome  c ) injected after every fifth sample.   The MS analysis was done in the 2-GHz extended dynamic range mode under the following conditions: mass range, 100–2000  m / z ; acquisition rate, 1 spectrum/s; data storage, profile and centroid mode; fragmentor, 175 V; skimmer, 65 V; OCT 1 RF Vpp, 750 V; spray voltage, ∼1800 V; drying gas temp, 325 °C; drying gas flow (N 2 ), 6 liter/min. Mass correction was performed during analysis using internal standards with  m / z  of 371.31559 (originating from a ubiquitous background ion of dioctyl adipate (plasticizer)) and  m / z  of 1221.990637 (HP-1221 calibration standard) continuously evaporating from a wetted wick inside the spray chamber. Data Analysis of Spiked CSF Samples   Raw LC-MS data were exported in mzData format using quantitative analysis (B.03.01) in the MassHunter software package in centroid mode to limit file size and analysis time. These data were processed by all different workflow combinations (see  supplemental Section 1.3  for parameters and execution details), which lead to the construction of multiple matched feature matrices, each containing 10 LC-MS analyses at two spiking concentration level