>Methods   Software and packages   Several software and software packages were used throughout this study:  Excel 365  (Microsoft) was used for quick data visualization and prioritization;  CFM-ID  4.4.7 [ 22 ,  61 – 65 ] was used to perform  in silico  calculations of compound SMILES;  Docker Desktop  4.28.0.0 ( https://www.docker.com/ ) was used to connect to the CFM-ID container for non-web-based batch processing;  PowerShell  (Microsoft) was used to call command lines through the CFM-ID Docker image for batch processing;  Julia  1.10.2 [ 66 ] was used for data clean-up of CFM-ID outputs, filling of metadata, package integration for structural clean-up, and for generation of figures used throughout; the  RDKit  package (version 2024.09.4) [ 67 ] was used for structural clean-up of SMILES and to obtain compound metadata;  PugRest API  ( https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/docs/pug-rest ) [ 68 ] was used to obtain information of missing SMILES;  mzVault  2.3 (Thermo Scientific) was used for conversion of.msp outputs to.db format;  DB Browser for SQLite  3.12.2 ( https://sqlitebrowser.org/ ) was used to perform SQLite queries on generated databases for fast structural assignment;  Matlab  R2024a [ 69 ] was used for merging of database duplicate entries using Database Explorer integration [ 70 ];  MZmine  4.3 [ 59 ] was used for feature detection in a non-targeted LC-HRMS dataset;  Chemical Sketch Tool  ( https://www.rcsb.org/chemical-sketch ) was used for drawing of chemical structures. Masslist clean-up   The NORMAN SusDat (version 2024) suspect list was downloaded as.xlsx format from  https://www.norman-network.com/nds/SLE/ . This version contains information of 120,514 unique compounds present in NORMAN suspect list exchange lists S001-S111. Of these, 110,402 (91.6% of the original list) compounds had compatible SMILES. The remaining missing SMILES entries were mined from PubChem [ 71 ] using the PugRest API [ 68 ] through a Matlab script. Thus, an additional 2997 SMILES were obtained through either names, CAS, InChI, or InChIKey, to reach a total of 113,399 (94.1%) substances with computation ready SMILES (cf. SI-1). Before  in silico  predictions, RDKit [ 67 ] was used to clean-up the SMILES structures by removal of salts and neutralization of the structure. After this step, 330 structures were still in their salted form (i.e., containing “.” in the SMILES string) and were removed from the dataset. Then, 67 compounds with masses less than 40 Da were removed, as well as 1487 compounds with masses higher than 1000 Da—including all 336 compounds with more than 200 atoms (the current limitation for CFM-ID calculations). Lastly, 316 compounds with charge  ≥ 2 were removed, as CFM-ID only supports calculation of single-charged species. As some de-salted structures might be identical, identical SMILES were merged by string comparison of canonical SMILES, removing replicates, resulting in a final number of 93,590 unique compounds. SMILES representing various stereoisomers, e.g., were kept due to their different chemical representation, though these would provide (near-)identical predicted MS/MS spectra. The compounds were then divided into three groups: negatively charged compounds (50) for [M+e] -  predictions, positively charged compounds (2,536) for [M-e] +  predictions, and 91,004 neutral compounds for [M+H] +  and [M-H] -  predictions, respectively. All other adduct types (e.g., ammonium and sodium) are not supported by CFM-ID calculations and were therefore omitted from this study. CFM-ID 4.4.7 calculations   In silico  calculations of SMILES were performed in batch mode using CFM-ID 4.4.7 [ 22 ] through the use of PowerShell and connection to the CFM-ID Docker container. CFM-ID provides a predicted spectrum for 10 eV, 20 eV, and 40 eV for each SMILES entry, and as such, it calculated around 550,000 spectra, which took around 10 days on a Thinkpad T16 AMD Gen 2 (AMD Ryzen 7 Pro 7840U / 3.3–5.1 GHz / 16 MB Cache, 32 GB LPDDR5X DRAM). The resulting output file formats were .msp (NIST) and contained information of compound ID, SMILES, collision energy, the number of fragments, and m/z and abundance of each fragment. NIST format   Metadata of the output .msp-files were filled in using Julia [ 66 ] and RDKit [ 67 ] to obtain InChI, InChIKey, adduct type, ionization mode, corrected collision energies, formula, and precursor mass for each entry. This allowed for easy integration into open-access data processing software such as MZmine [ 59 ]. Compound names were kept as the SusDat ID to avoid special characters while still allowing for easy cross-referencing with the NORMAN Suspect List Exchange knowledgebase ( https://www.norman-network.com/nds/susdat/ ). Database format   For integration into the commercial software Compound Discoverer (Thermo Scientific), additional steps are required to convert the .msp file format into a cleaned database (.db format). For this, Julia, mzVault, Matlab, and DB Browser for SQLite were used. First, as part of the .msp output clean-up procedure described above, the Julia script also corrects for potential inconsistencies between defined peak number and actual peak number if present. Afterwards, mzVault was used to import and convert the .msp into a .db format. The resulting database file thereby contained a compound entry per spectrum (thus three entries per compound—one for each collision energy) with lacking structural information. mzVault could in principle be used to mine both metadata—including molecular structures—and to merge duplicates. However, this is done by mining the ChemSpider [ 72 ] knowledgebase, which is both time-consuming and can result in still missing—or even incorrect—annotations. Another challenge was—due to the size of the databases (over 250,000 entries in each)—that merging and metadata search within the mzVault software was not easily resolved without experiencing stability and run-time issues. Instead, DB Browser for SQLite in conjunction with Julia and Matlab was used to quickly (in less than 10 min) merge duplicate compound entries and mine and insert molecular structures (SDF-format) using SQLite queries. The cleaned databases could thus be used directly with Compound Discoverer, containing all necessary (structural) metadata for optimal identification workflows with respect to both ease-of-use and accuracy. Feature detection and spectral matching   To explore and to evaluate the quality of the generated  in silico  libraries, a feature detection workflow using MZmine [ 59 ] was performed on a dataset of 81 ground water samples previously analyzed with a nanoLC-Orbitrap Q Exactive HF (240K) recorded in ddMS2-mode using 20, 70, and 120 NCE in stepped collision energies, described in detail elsewhere [ 73 ]. Peaks were identified using a minimum intensity threshold of 1E6 and a mass accuracy threshold of 5 ppm. Following smoothing [ 74 ], feature resolution, alignment across samples (±0.50 min), keep MS2-only, isotope, and duplicate filtering, gap filling, ion identity networking [ 75 ], and blank filtration (S/B > 10), detected features were screened towards either experimental spectral libraries (described below) or the generated  in silico  libraries. Spectral matching was done using a precursor m/z tolerance of 3 ppm, fragment m/z tolerance of 5 ppm, and unweighted cosine similarity scoring, defined in Eq.  1 , where  v  and  u  are intensity vectors of the experimental and reference spectra, respectively, with a minimum score of 0.1 and minimum required number of fragments of 2—including the precursor ion. Though several modifications (weighting towards intensities and/or m/z) exist for calculating the cosine similarity, the unweighted algorithm was used for the most general representation of similarity scoring.     cos θ = v · u v · u   1     Unmatched reference and experimental signals were kept but matched to zero. Results were then manually investigated to filter out potential false positives. The lenient spectral search parameters were implemented to allow for more matches in the initial data processing by ensuring the inclusion of compounds with either little fragmentation or with spectrum predictions of sub-optimal quality. This step was important to prevent the loss of many interesting suspects as empirical data suggested that spectra measured on the Orbitrap system were heavily affected by both chimeric and/or matrix-related interference. Since CFM-ID is trained on (and predicts) spectra obtained on QTOF analyzers, small discrepancies are expected in the spectral similarity scores between these two analyzer architectures (TOF and Orbitrap). Exact MZmine-processing parameters can be found in the batch file attached with the  Supporting Information . Experimental spectral libraries   A total of 1,543,129 high-resolution reference spectra were obtained through various open-access spectral databases:  MS-DIAL  [ 60 ], version 19, downloaded August 8, 2024, 367,674 spectra.  MSnLib  [ 76 ], downloaded April 11, 2024, 85,382 spectra.  Massbank of North America (MoNA)  ( https://mona.fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/ ), downloaded July 11, 2024, 148,546 spectra.  Massbank EU  [ 77 ], downloaded June 5, 2024, 117,283 spectra.  GNPS  [ 78 ], a public collection of user-curated spectral databases, downloaded November 1, 2024, 816,675 spectra.  HighResNPS , a spectral library containing entries of new psychoactive substances [ 79 ], downloaded April 28, 2023, 3280 spectra.  Folberth et al.  [ 80 ], a library of endogenous metabolite, downloaded October 30, 2024, 4159 spectra.  Wang et al.  [ 81 ], a spectral library of polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), downloaded July 9, 2024, 130 spectra. Results and discussion   Validation   To assess the quality of the  in silico -based annotations, 344 chemical standards (cf. SI-3) were spiked (100 ng of each compound) into a 1 L groundwater sample—prior to sample preparation—for an anticipated final concentration of 100 ng/L. These standards were then annotated in matrix through MZmine (301 and 139 in positive and negative modes, respectively) from in-house reference spectra that had previously been recorded in pure solvent at similar acquisition parameters. Spectral similarities were then compared to those of the  in silico  in regards to unweighted cosine scores, explained intensity, and the number of matched fragments shown in Figs.  1 ,  2 , and  3 .   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Unweighted cosine similarity scores between predicted spectra ( y -axes) and reference spectra ( x -axes) for 344 analytical standards (301 in positive mode, 139 in negative mode) spiked in matrix and recorded in positive and negative electrospray ionization modes, respectively Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Explained intensity between predicted spectra ( y -axes) and reference spectra ( x -axes) for 344 analytical standards (301 in positive mode, 139 in negative mode) spiked in matrix and recorded in positive and negative electrospray ionization modes, respectively Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Number of matched fragments between predicted spectra ( y -axes) and reference spectra ( x -axes) for 344 analytical standards (301 in positive mode, 139 in negative mode) spiked in matrix and recorded in positive and negative electrospray ionization modes, respectively Comparing the experimentally measured spectra of the 344 compounds with those recorded in pure solvent (Fig.  1 ), the 10th percentile (i.e., 90% of data values were above this value) of cosine similarity scores were 0.903 and 0.929 for positive and negative modes, respectively. In contrast to this, the 10th percentile scores were only 0.222 and 0.03, respectively, when compared to the  in silico  generated spectra. Of the 344 validation compounds, 107 were part of the original training data for the CFM-ID prediction model (see SI-2). The spectral similarity score is thus significantly lower for the predicted spectra—and especially for spectra predicted for negative mode—than when comparing towards experimentally recorded reference spectra. This means that it can be difficult to define a specific similarity score threshold for CFM-ID predicted spectra, which impacts the number of false/true positive annotations obtained in a classic non-targeted data pipeline. To obtain a better understanding of the relationship between similarity score and experimental and predicted spectra, looking deeper into the similarity scores for the experimental reference spectra reveals that less than 7% of the recorded spectra had spectral similarity scores below 0.8 and only around 4% less than 0.7. Thus, more than 95% of similarity scores based on experimental reference spectra were above 0.7 (the minimum required value that, according to the community consensus, is required for an appropriate compound annotation [ 19 ,  78 ].) Still, even under identical acquisition parameters, a small number of compounds (12 and 5 in positive and negative modes, respectively) would be rejected based solely on their similarity scores being below the threshold of 0.7. Applying the same threshold to filter through similarity scores of predicted spectra would reject nearly 40% of the true positive annotations (126 and 54, respectively), clearly indicating a need for adjustment in traditional scoring thresholds when implementing predicted spectra.   Looking at the other scoring metrics, specifically the explained intensity scores (Fig.  2 ), only 3 experimental entries had scores between 0.7 and 0.8, with the remaining 341 entries having an explained intensity score above 0.8—and more than 90% of those having a cosine score above 0.9. There is therefore a better correlation between true positive annotations and the explained intensity score—and a very high correlation when accounting for both cosine and explained intensity scores. Compared to the scores for the predicted spectra, the values are again significantly worse than for the experimental reference spectra. More than 30% of explained intensities were below 0.7 for both positive and negative modes. In positive mode, 58% of predicted spectra had cosine scores > 0.7, with 74% > 0.5. Of those above 0.5, 90% had an explained intensity value above 0.5 as well. As such, reducing the required thresholds for both cosine similarity and explained intensity to, for example, 0.2 and 0.7, respectively, should account for the reduced values when using predicted spectra. With a higher threshold of explained intensity, the likelihood of false positives is reduced. Also worth noting is the amount of matched fragments (Fig.  3 ). A minimum value is in some software (e.g., MZmine) required before performing spectral search and is important in order to reduce the number of false positives. If not chosen carefully however, this value can easily filter out true positive candidates if set too high. From Fig.  3 , it is seen that the 10th percentile was 4 and 2 for positive and negative modes for reference matches, but 2 and 1 for the  in silico  libraries. In fact, 48% of the predicted spectra in negative mode had only 1 matching fragment. Thus, when performing spectral scoring, it is important to consider the number of fragments to include. Allowing for a lower number of matched fragments (2 or 3) increases the amount of true positives, while the risk of false positives can be reduced by accounting for both the explained intensity, cosine similarity, and spectral purity. As such, it is recommended to keep predicted and experimental reference spectra in separate spectral repositories for better (and more correct) annotation rate and to adjust the threshold settings accordingly.   As less than 5% of cosine scores between the experimental and reference spectra of confirmed compounds were below 0.7, a threshold of this value seems ideal in regards to data filtration. When comparing experimental spectra with external experimental MS2 reference spectral libraries, a reduction in similarity scores is to be expected. This is in part due to possible impurities in the experimental spectra originating from matrix effects and isobaric and/or chimeric interference, and deviations between the analyzed and compared spectra with respect to mass accuracy, instrumentation/analyzer type, acquisition parameters, and sub-optimal fragmentation settings [ 82 ]. For predicted spectra, any discrepancy between measured and predicted fragment intensities can be assigned to the uncertainty of the specific prediction model.   If experimental information indicates a reduction in the quality and/or purity of either the experimental or reference spectrum, the likelihood of a low cosine similarity score increases. Some knowledge of spectral quality is thus recommended when evaluating the annotations as reliance on a single mathematical value is often insufficient to fully determine whether or not a compound annotation is true or false. Following this, it is acceptable to annotate compounds with cosine scores less than 0.7 if sufficient evidence can back up the claimed identity. This can be, for example, the explained intensity, knowledge of retention time indices [ 54 ] and the isotopic pattern at the MS1 level. Especially the explained intensity is important. This is because explained intensity is less affected by spectral impurities and, as such, better differentiates between low cosine scores caused by either non-similarity or matrix and/or chimeric induced experimental impurities. Thus, a better measure of spectral similarity is an evaluation based on  both  cosine score and explained intensity, where thresholds for these values could be set to 0.7 and 0.9, respectively, for improved rejection of false positives. And as long as strict thresholds of the explained intensity were maintained, it would even be possible to reduce cosine score thresholds to as low as 0.4, increasing the annotatable space at the cost of an increase in the number of false positives. Comparing  in silico  and experimental spectral libraries   The generated  in silico  libraries were evaluated by comparison with open-access experimental reference libraries on a groundwater dataset previously described and analyzed [ 73 ]. In negative mode, 3116 MS2-containing features were detected. Using the generated  in silico  libraries, 549 spectral matches were obtained at a cosine score  ≥  0.7, with an additional 586 matches between 0.1 and 0.7 and 1981 substances with scores < 0.1. In contrast, using experimental reference libraries, 261 annotations were obtained at a cosine  ≥  0.7, 461 matches between 0.1 and 0.7, and 2394 matches with scores < 0.1. In positive mode, 11,682 MS2-containing features were detected. A total of 1561 spectral matches were obtained from the  in silico  library at a cosine score  ≥  0.7, with 1846 matches between 0.1 and 0.7 and 8275 features remaining unannotated. Using experimental reference libraries, 755 annotations were found at cosine score  ≥  0.7, 1551 between 0.1 and 0.7, and 9376 at < 0.1. Thus, roughly twice as many annotations can be obtained in groundwater samples by using the generated  in silico  libraries compared to using only reference spectra. Following this, a significant amount of the hits (with a score above 0.7) could be attributed solely to the  in silico  libraries.   With a total annotated coverage of 606 out of 3116 (19%) in negative mode and 1764 out of 11,682 (15%) in positive mode, only around 10% of this can be uniquely attributed to the use of reference libraries (57 and 203 unique hits, respectively). The remaining 90% are either uniquely attributed to  in silico  libraries or are in common between the two library types (cf. SI-4). Thus, the annotatable space is greatly improved through the use of  in silico -based fragmentation libraries. It should be stated that overlapping hits between reference and  in silico  hits in this context do not necessarily correspond to identical annotations but simply if a detected feature was assigned an annotation during both the library searches. Considering that many  in silico  entries are not found in reference libraries, the overlapping annotations likely differ. Still, using  in silico  libraries to assist with compound annotation more than doubled the number of annotations obtained compared to using only experimental reference libraries.   As the applied mass threshold of the spectral library search was 3 ppm, this could exclude potential candidates present in the reference databases where lower MS1 resolution (compared to 240,000) was used. Despite being correct annotations, these entries might have mass deviations greater than 3 ppm compared to the recorded data. As such, the number of annotations achieved from the reference spectra might be lower than the highest possible amount and could have been increased with increasing mass tolerance. Identification of compounds not present in reference libraries   Using the generated  in silico  libraries, several new pesticides transformation products (TP) were discovered in the groundwater samples (Table  1 ). Despite having cosine scores between 0.2 and 0.4, some were confirmed at level 1 using reference standards: triallate TP TCPSA (NS00008158), propiconazole TP SYN 547889 (NS00114332) (previously identified in Danish surface waters [ 83 ]), fluazifop-butyl TP CGA142110 (NS00067405), and triflusulfuron-methyl TP IN-M7222 (NS00067847). The reason for the low similarity scores could be due to none of the identified compounds being captured well by the CFM-ID predictions model, as they were not part of the original training set of the model. A PFAS previously unreported, but recently discovered in drinking water [