>Materials and Methods   Tissue Procurement   All human subjects were treated in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Tissues used for lipidomics were obtained from cadaveric donor eyes, which were procured from Eversight Vision Eye Bank (Cincinnati, OH, USA) and Lions Eye Bank (Miami, FL, USA). All donors were Caucasians, inclusive of both sexes, with mean age ± standard deviation of 72.3 ± 5.9 years for control donors, and 70.3 ± 10.5 years for glaucoma donors ( Supplementary Table S1 ). The time for donor eyes’ postmortem to enucleation time ranged from 3 to 21 hours ( Supplementary Table S1 ). The postmortem to enucleation time between control and glaucoma donors showed no significant statistical difference ( Supplementary Fig. S3 ). All eyes were kept in a chamber filled with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at 4°C. Patients were required to have a clear diagnosis of primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) and have detailed ophthalmic and medical histories. Patients were considered viable glaucoma donors if the patients had at least two static perimetry recordings (within 1–2 years) and showed distinct vision loss over time, as described previously. 13  Many donor eyes also had measurements of NFL thickness, and other clinical parameters that aid in diagnosis of glaucoma. Acceptable control eyes had no medical history of optic neuropathy. Donor eyes were shipped out immediately, and within 36 hours postenucleation, and on acquiring the eyes dissection was performed. The ON was carefully cut out from ONH, and the fatty tissue surrounding the nerve was removed. Samples were washed with sterile 1X PBS prior to any further analysis. ONs were stored at −80°C until lipidomic analysis. There were 12 out of 40 glaucoma eyes, and 11 out of 27 control donor eyes that were deemed acceptable for lipidomic analysis. Additional donor tissues were utilized for protein quantification, Western blot, and ELISA analysis ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Lipid and Protein Extraction   The ON tissue was weighed, minced, and homogenized. A modified Bligh and Dyer method was used to extract the lipids, which was described in our prior reports. 28  Methanol and chloroform were added in a 2:1 ratio to each sample. Samples were vortexed for 2 minutes followed by 2 minutes of sonication in an ultrasonic bath. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) water (3 mL) and chloroform (1.5 mL) were added and the samples were vortexed. All reagents were of LC-MS grade. To obtain phase separation, the samples were centrifuged at 9800xg at 4°C. The organic phase containing the lipids was collected, dried with argon gas, and stored at −20°C until mass spectrometric analysis. Uniformity of extraction was ensured by adding an extraction standard, usually PC13:0/13:0 (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL, USA) as described in our prior reports. 17 , 29 , 30  Prior to mass spectrometric analysis, the dry lipid samples were reconstituted in 50 µL of chloroform to methanol (1:1). Separate donor ON tissue was used for Western blot and ELISA protein analyses. The tissue was homogenized, centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was collected. A PHAST gel (GE Healthcare BioSciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) was performed followed by a densitometry analysis using a bovine serum albumin standard to estimate protein concentrations. The protein amounts were normalized among all the samples. High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)-Mass Spectrometry   The lipid samples were subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. The analysis was performed on an Accela 600 HPLC system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with a heated electrospray ionization (HESI) source. Reverse phase HPLC was performed on an Acclaim C30 column (particle size 3.0 µm, 150 × 2.1 mm inner diameter; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an injection volume of 5 µL and a column temperature of 30°C. The gradient ran from 15% to 65% B for 20 minutes at a flow rate of 260 µL/min. Solvent A was composed of methanol and water (60:40) with 0.2% formic acid and 10 mM ammonium acetate, and solvent B was composed of methanol and chloroform (60:40) with 0.2% formic acid and 10 mM ammonium acetate. The HESI source was operated in positive ionization mode with a spray voltage of 4.4 KV, heated capillary of 350°C, and heater temperature of 275°C. The S-lens radio frequency was set to 70. The gas flow rate was set to 45 units and auxiliary gas to 15 units. The mass range was 200 to 3000 m/z and the resolution for full scan was set to 70,000 and 17,500 for data-dependent ms/ms acquisition. The automatic gain control target was 1 × 10 E6 , and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The isolation window was set to 1.3 m/z, and the dynamic exclusion to 3 seconds. The stepped normalized collision energies were 19 and 30 eV. At the beginning and end of the run, we ran a fixed amount of a standard mix (usually EquiSPLASH LIPIDOMIX; Catalog number 330731, Avanti Polar Lipids) to ensure the proper functioning of the instruments. Lipid Identification, Relative Quantification, and Processing   Raw mass spectrometry files were processed for lipid identification using LipidSearch software version 4.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Tokyo, Japan). For identification, the precursor and product ion search tolerance were 5 ppm; product ion intensity; filters: top rank, main isomer peak, FA priority; quantification: m/z tolerance 5 ppm, retention time tolerance 0.5 minutes. Adducts used in positive mode were +H, +NH 4 , +H-H 2 O, +H-2H 2 O, and +2H 2 +. The samples were run in triplicates and all lipid classes were searched for. The samples rejected by the software were not included in the statistical analysis. For alignment, the retention time was 0.1 minutes, and the top ranked filtered and main isomer peak were selected. All peaks with the same annotated lipid species were merged in the result file. The M-score for the alignments was set to 5, C-score to 2.0, and fatty acids chain identification was set to “A” and “B” allowing the positive identification of the chains. The data exported from LipidSearch 4.1 were grouped by lipid class, fatty acid, and lipid species. The three independent runs for each sample were aligned in the LipidSearch software and only samples with consistent peaks were accepted. We performed relative quantification of the lipids using the peak area following the LipidSearch protocol. The triplicate mean peak intensity values for each lipid class were averaged, and the data were further analyzed in GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA) and Metaboanalyst 4.0 (Xia Lab at MGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada). Statistical Analyses   Analyses were conducted using MetaboAnalyst 4.0 and GraphPad Prism 8. For principal component analysis (PCA), data were both quantile normalized and log 2  transformed to remove skewness and nonbiological, procedure-based variation. In GraphPad Prism, bar graphs were created, and the average peak intensity values were shown as mean ± SE. Outliers were removed using the ROUT method 31  with Q = 1%. Prior to any statistical analysis, the Shapiro-Wilk test was used to establish normalcy ( P  > 0.05), and the Levene test determined equality of variance. For each lipid class, an unpaired  t -test with Gaussian distribution was implemented to detect statistical differences between control and glaucomatous LPL classes. Further statistical analysis was performed on the four statistically significant lipid classes to determine if there were peak intensity differences between LPL conversion enzymes in control and glaucomatous ON. Genomic Data Analyses   An LPL metabolic pathway was constructed based on knowledge derived from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), 32  BRENDA, 33  and Uniprot 34  database. The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) entry  GSE45570 35  dataset was used to construct this LPL metabolic pathway. The enzymes found to be upregulated/downregulated in the pathway were confirmed by performing Western blot and ELISA analyses on the 12 ON samples (6 control and 6 POAG). Western Blot and ELISA Analyses   Western blot and ELISA analyses were used to detect the enzyme levels in POAG ONs compared with non-POAG controls. The enzymes detected were those found to be upregulated/downregulated in the GEO dataset. For Western blot, equal amounts (10 µL) of protein per sample were fractioned on a 4% to 20% sodium dodecyl-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Gel electrophoresis was performed at 80 V for 30 minutes, and 100 V for an additional 45 minutes. The gel was transferred onto a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane using precut blotting sandwiches (Immun-Blot PVDF Membrane Sandwiches, catalog no. 1620238; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The PVDF membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat milk powder in a tris-buffer saline solution of pH 8. The primary antibodies against 1-acyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase gamma or AGPAT3 (Proteintech; rabbit polyclonal), Autotaxin or ATX/ENPP2 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA; mouse polyclonal), Glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase 1 or GDE1 (Proteintech; rabbit polyclonal), Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase or GAPDH (Abcam; mouse monoclonal), Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 4 or GPAT4 (Proteintech; rabbit polyclonal), Phosphatidylcholine sterol acyltransferase or LCAT (Proteintech, Rosemont, IL; rabbit polyclonal), Lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 1 or LPCAT1 (Proteintech; mouse monoclonal), Phosphatidate phosphatase LPIN2 or LPIN2 (Abcam; rabbit polyclonal), Calcium-dependent phospholipase A2 or PLA2G5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific; mouse monoclonal), and Phospholipid phosphatase 3 or PLPP3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific; mouse monoclonal) were used for protein detection. For Western blot and ELISA analysis, Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) secondary antibodies goat anti-rabbit HRP (1:2000; Abcam) and goat anti-mouse (1:2000; Abcam) were used. Western blot was developed using chemiluminescence reagents on a ImageQuant LAS4000 (Cytiva, Marlborough, MA). ELISA was performed in triplicates using 0.5 µL of extracted protein from control and glaucomatous ON in 96-well plates following established protocols. The absorbance was measured at 450 nm on a plate reader. The absorbance of each protein was normalized to GAPDH amounts in control and glaucomatous ON, respectively. An unpaired  t -test was run to determine differences in absorbance between control and glaucomatous samples. Results   The PCA of LPLs of 11 cadaveric control (average age: 72.3 ± 5.9 years; 6 men, 5 women) and 12 glaucomatous (average age: 70.3 ± 10.5 years; 8 men, 4 women) ONs (total of 23 human cadaveric eyes;  Supplementary Table S1 ) presented two distinct clusters ( Fig. 1 A). The scores for the first two principal components, PC1 and PC2, explained the variance, indicating that glaucomatous and control ONs have significantly different LPL classes. These distinct clusters also showed the similar distinct clusters on partial least square discriminant analysis ( Supplementary Fig. S4 ) and provoked our interest into LPL differences between glaucomatous and healthy control ON.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Analysis of principal component and amounts of different LPLs of the ON of cadaveric human control and glaucomatous ON. ( A ) PCA of total LPLs of ON was created using Metaboanalyst 4.0. Mean peak intensity mass spectrometric data were quantile normalized and log2 transformed. The control and glaucoma group symbols are as indicated. ( B ) Mean peak intensity (log2 transformed, quantile normalized) of LPA, LPC, LPE, and DG in glaucomatous versus normal control samples determined from mass spectrometric data as indicated. For each lipid class, we performed an unpaired parametric Student's  t -test between control and glaucoma (**** P  < 0.001, ** P  < 0.02). We next analyzed the mass spectrometric data for species of LPLs: lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE), lysophosphatidylethanol (LPEt), and lysodimethylphosphatidylethanolamine (LdMePE). The mean peak intensity values of LPA, LPE, and LPC were significantly lower in glaucomatous ON ( Fig. 1 B). The results of the  t -test concluded that there were differences between control and glaucomatous ON lipid amounts in all searched LPL classes. A heatmap showed that the differences in control and glaucomatous ON are representative and shared by a majority of samples in each group ( Fig. 2 ). We also determined the relative abundance of precursor species of LPLs, namely phosphatidic acid (PA), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), and a related species diacylglycerol (DG) ( Fig. 3 ). Although none of the precursor phospholipids showed statistically significant differences between control and glaucomatous ON ( Fig. 3 ), there was a significant increase in DG in glaucomatous ON ( Fig. 1 B). Based on these findings, we decided to focus our study on LPA, LPC, and LPE and their interconnected metabolic pathways.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Heatmap of LPE, LPA, and LPC. The heatmap was created using Metaboanlyst 4.0. Mass spectrometric data were quantile normalized and log2 transformed and has been organized by group (control and glaucoma). Analysis parameters included autoscaling based on samples, Ward clustering algorithm, and Euclidean distance measure. Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Mean peak intensities of PA, PC, and PE between human control and glaucomatous ON. Quantile normalized and log2 transformed mass spectrometric mean peak intensities were used to estimate relative abundance between control and glaucomatous ON as indicated. An unpaired parametric Student's  t -test between control and glaucoma (with Gaussian distribution) was performed for each lipid class to determine significance. Several enzymes are involved in the synthesis and degradation of LPA, LPC, and LPE. The synthesis, degradation, and interconversion of these lipid species is highly interconnected and rather complicated ( Supplementary Fig. S1 ). To analyze level differences in catalytic enzymes, we used genomic analysis of mRNA to serve as guidance to pursue further actual proteome-level changes in these enzymes. We used genomic data ( GSE45570 ) to determine the relative mRNA amounts of each enzyme in control compared with glaucomatous ON. Our analysis found four enzymes with significant differences: LPIN2, LCAT, PLPP3, and GPAT4 between control and glaucomatous ON ( Fig. 4 ). LCAT, LPIN2, and PLPP3 levels were significantly increased, whereas GPAT4 levels were significantly decreased in glaucomatous ON ( Fig. 4 ). We also evaluated the differences in PLA2G5 and autotaxin (ENPP2 or ATX). Our analysis showed lack of significant changes in PLA2G5 or ATX mRNA levels in glaucomatous ON compared with controls ( Fig. 4 ).   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Evaluation of mRNA expression levels of LPL conversion enzymes in glaucomatous and control ON samples. The GEO dataset  GSE45570  was used for these analyses. The dataset provided mRNA amounts for each protein in ( n  = 6) control and ( n  = 6) POAG ONHs. The RNA amount for genes of interest was obtained for each sample and averaged across control and glaucomatous samples, respectively. A significant overexpression of LPIN2, PLPP3, and LCAT, and a significant downregulation of GPAT4 protein corresponding mRNA was found in glaucomatous samples. We performed an unpaired parametric Student's  t -test with Gaussian distribution between control and glaucoma (** P  < 0.01; * P  < 0.02). Because LPA is one of the significantly reduced LPLs in glaucomatous ON, known to have pleotropic effects and analysis of genomic data showed changes in enzymatic levels, we next evaluated lysophosphatidic acid receptors (LPAR) 1-6 mRNA levels as well to better understand if receptors are also altered in concert with enzyme levels. However, our analysis showed no significant difference between any of the LPAR receptors ( Fig. 5 ).   Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Analysis of genomic data ( GSE45570 ) for all six LPARs and ATX. There was no statistically significant difference in the amount of LPAR 1-6 or ATX mRNA in glaucomatous ON compared with controls. We performed an unpaired parametric Student's  t -test between control and glaucoma to test for significance. We performed quantitative ELISA ( Fig. 6 A) and Western blot analysis ( Fig. 6 B) to determine whether protein levels are in conformity with mRNA levels ( Fig.4 ). The control and glaucomatous ON protein extracts were used to determine the protein levels of ATX or ENPP2, LPIN2, LCAT, PLA2G5, PLPP3, and GPAT4 ( Figs. 6 A, 6B). In GAPDH normalized ELISA ( Fig. 6 A) and Western blots ( Fig. 6 B), there were elevated levels of LCAT, LPIN2, PLA2G5, and PLPP3 in glaucomatous ON, and decreased levels of GPAT4. The Western blot and ELISA analyses were consistent with the genomic data. The ATX or ENPP2 showed no significant difference between control and glaucomatous ON, respectively ( Figs. 6 A, 6B). We also performed ELISA analysis for AGPAT3, GDE1, and LPCAT1. There were differences in mRNA levels of these enzymes, although they were not statistically significant. However, due to differences in mRNA levels we decided to perform additional experiments. ELISA analysis confirmed that the protein levels of these enzymes in glaucoma are comparable to controls.   Figure 6.     Open in a new tab   Quantitative estimates of enzymatic proteins in the control and glaucomatous ON. ( A ) ELISA analysis. ON proteins (0.5 µg) with antibodies specific to enzymatic proteins as indicated. Mean absorbance at 450 nm was determined after incubating with secondary antibodies following established protocols. We performed an unpaired parametric Student's  t -test between control and glaucoma (** P  < 0.02, * P  < 0.05). ( B ) Representative Western blot analysis. ON proteins (5 µg) were transferred on to PVDF membrane and probed with antibodies specific to enzymatic proteins as indicated. We have presented a schematic depiction to summarize our findings ( Fig. 7 ). The nonbilayer lipids, LPA, LPC and LPE, shown in blue are downregulated in glaucoma; DG, a precursor to certain phospholipids, is shown in red and is upregulated in glaucoma, whereas the lipids whose levels were unchanged are in black, including bilayer lipids PC and PE. The enzymes depicted in red are upregulated in glaucoma, for example LPIN2 and PLPP3, whereas the GPAT4 depicted in blue are downregulated. PLA2G5 and LCAT are extracellular, whereas GPAT4, LPIN2, and PLPP3 are found in cytosolic side whether bound to specific or multiple organelles.   Figure 7.     Open in a new tab   A schematic diagram depicting our findings of the aberrations present in the metabolism of LPA, LPE, and LPC. A depiction of how the pathways of the respective LPLs are related, and the enzymes of interest that help catalyze each metabolic reaction. The enzymes depicted in  red  are upregulated in glaucoma, whereas the enzymes depicted in  blue  are downregulated. PLA2G5 and LCAT are extracellular, whereas GPAT4, LPIN2, and PLPP3 are cytosolic. Discussion   LPLs are nonbilayer lipids. 36  They may be generated owing to processes consistent with biosynthesis, 37  but they may be generated in processes that are consistent with degradation or lysis of lipids, 17  including bilayer lipids. LPLs generated in several tissues are commensurate with increased pressure on membranes and/or owing to inflammation. 37 , 38  Glaucoma is associated with elevated IOP, 39 , 40  and inflammation 41  has also been linked to pathophysiology of glaucoma. Signaling mediated by LPLs has been thought to play a critical role in the physiology of IOP homeostasis. 27  LPL signaling mediated by LPA also plays a critical signaling role in the nervous system. The six LPA and five sphingosine 1-phosphate and their lipid legends are involved in regulation of various functions in the CNS. 42  Lipid metabolism assumes a central position in many neuronal diseases that are progressive in nature. Lipidomics studies have proven to provide significant insight for neurologic disorders. 43  To further study the role of lipids in CNS diseases, we have performed high-resolution mass spectrometry on human ON extracted lipids. 13  We analyzed glucosylsphingosine lipids in the ON in our previous studies, and due to lack of any comprehensive studies on ON LPLs, we chose to focus here on LPLs for their importance in neuronal signaling, function, and pathophysiology. 37 , 38 , 42  Analysis of mass spectrometry lipidomic data revealed a decrease in levels of LPA, LPC, an