>Methods   Overall Workflow   To develop, validate, and test these algorithms, we followed three steps consisting of (1) centroid calculations, (2) developing a model for the prediction of mass peak widths, and finally (3) predicting the mass profiles using the model and centroids,  Figure  1 . All the steps are explained in detail below.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   All the steps taken from the raw data to profile prediction. Chromatograms   Previously acquired data of complex samples were used for the algorithm development, validation, and testing. The data consisted of 30,000 MS1 scans between the  m / z  values of 50 and 1200 Da generated with quadrupole time of flight (QToF) instruments using electrospray ionization (ESI) sources. These scans belonged to seven LC-HRMS runs, four in positive mode and three in negative mode. Additionally, the data were generated by three different instruments/vendors (i.e., two Sciex, three Waters, and two Agilent) using different experimental conditions (Section S1 of the  Supporting Information ). Finally, all samples consisted of complex sample matrices ranging from surface water extracts to biosolid extracts. More details regarding the type of samples and experimental conditions are provided elsewhere 3 , 16 , 29 − 31  and in the  Supporting Information S1 . Data   Prior to data processing, all chromatograms were converted to the mzXML format 32  using ProteoWizard software package version 3, 64 bit. 33  The mzXML files were then imported into julia programing language using MS_Import.jl package (see Code Availability). Peaks in the mass domain were extracted from these scans to generate the dataset used consisting of 2.7 × 10 11 m / z  values, intensities, retention factors, 34 , 35  and mass peak width at half-height. The first three parameters were used as independent variables (i.e., predictors) while the fourth was used as a dependent variable (i.e., to be predicted). For the extraction of this information, we developed a self-adjusting centroiding algorithm (details are provided below). The centroiding algorithm uses input parameters of the raw data, nominal resolution, signal to background ratio, minimum intensity threshold, and  R 2  threshold to assess the goodness of fit for a Gaussian distribution (details are provided in Section S2 of the  Supporting Information ).   For the data pre-processing, the intensity of each peak was divided by the maximum signal of that scan, which resulted into unit scaling of the intensities. This pre-processing step minimized instrument and sample-dependent variance observed in the data. After pre-processing, the data was divided into training, validation, and test sets. The training and validation sets consisted of the data coming from 28,000 scans, which was divided in ratios of 70 and 30%, respectively (selected at random). On the other hand, the test set was used for the assessment of the generated model as well as for the profile 14  prediction. Self-Adjusting Centroiding Algorithm   The centroiding process includes five steps consisting of signal selection, smoothing, Gaussian fit, calculating the centroid, and signal removal ( Figure S3 ). A detailed explanation of each step follows below.   Signal Selection   The centroiding algorithm starts with the most intense signal in each scan. After locating the maximum signal (i.e., apex of a mass peak), the algorithm employs the user-provided nominal resolution to estimate the mass peak width. The algorithm isolates a mass window two times the estimated window based on the first guess. In the next step, the algorithm follows the measured signal from the apex until either reaching the half-height intensity or the minimum intensity threshold set by the user. Smoothing   The selected signal is then smoothed using a simple moving-average filter with a window size of 3 points, which guarantees the removal of the instrument associated signal fluctuations without altering the analytical signal. 36 Gaussian Fit   The smoothed signal is used to calculate the mass window (“ c ”),  m / z  value (“ b ”), and the intensity (“ a ”) that are used for the Gaussian fit,  eq  1 , which previously has been shown to be adequate in predicting the mass peak profiles. 16 , 37  The algorithm fits a three parameter Gaussian to the smoothed signal and compares the generated adjusted  R 2  to the threshold set by the user,  eq  1 . In the case where the calculated  R 2  is ≥ the set threshold, the fit is considered successful and the signal is assumed to be a real peak.       1   Calculating the Centroid   To calculate the mass of the centroid, the algorithm uses the average of the estimated centroid mass using the fitted Gaussian and the apex of the measured signal. Before accepting the average value as the centroid, the algorithm calculates the difference between the  m / z  value of the measured and Gaussian predicted apex. If the difference is smaller than half of the measured mass peak width at half height, then the algorithm accepts the average value as the true centroid. This approach was employed as a filtering strategy for distinction of the true signal from the noise while providing a more accurate estimate of the centroid. Consequently, the signals that generate a successful Gaussian fit and meet this requirement were considered as true positives while signals that did not produce an acceptable fit or did not meet the above-mentioned criterion were considered true negative (i.e., noise). At this point, the calculated centroid and the maximum intensity are recorded. Signal Removal   The algorithm follows the measured intensity until it reaches the minimum intensity threshold set by the user. All the measured signals within this interval is set to half of the user defined intensity threshold, which enables the algorithm to move to the next most intense mass peak in the scan.   The algorithm repeats the above mentioned steps in an iterative approach until no signal above the user defined threshold is present in the data. For the performance assessment of the centroiding algorithm, we used MZmine due to the fact that the algorithms deployed within this software represent a suite of the most commonly used data processing tools. Moreover, our dataset included data acquired by three different vendors which hinder the possibility of direct comparison. Finally, the lack of knowledge regarding the used algorithms in the vendor products makes the direct comparison impossible. The detailed list of parameters and their selected values are reported in  Table S2  of the Supporting Information. It should be noted that these parameters were employed for all chromatograms independently from their matrix and/or vendor. Modeling   For modeling, a random forest regression 38  (RFR) strategy implemented in julia language v 1.5.3 28  (package DecisionTree.jl v. 0.10.10) was employed. The model utilized the  m / z  values, relative intensities, and the retention factors to predict the mass peak widths at half height. The model was initialized with 100 trees and minimum number of data in a leaf of 30. This model then went through an optimization procedure where a new model was built by varying each of the parameters at a time. The number of trees varied between 50 and 350 with steps of 50, whereas the minimum number of data points in the leaves varied between 1 and 30 with steps of 5. This resulted in a two-dimensional grid which was used to find the optimized model setting. The quality of each model was evaluated by monitoring the root mean square error of prediction as well as the correlation coefficient between the measured and predicted values, when applying the model to the validation set (i.e., the portion of data unseen by the model). 38  This strategy resulted in a final/optimized model with 250 trees and minimum leaf population of 10, which enabled the prediction of mass peak width via relative retention time,  m / z  value, and the relative intensity. It should be noted that this model used all three variables and only had access to the training set.   The optimized model was further validated, using an out-of-bag strategy including 500 bootstrapping samples as well as five-fold cross validation. 38 , 39  These two approaches enabled the mitigation of overfitting while resulting in a robust and reliable model. Profile Prediction   During profile prediction, a mass window of twice the size of the predicted peak width, consisting of 8 points, was used for profile generation. The number of points for the full mass profile prediction were selected based on the median number of points detected in the experimental mass profiles. On the other hand, the size of the mass window was selected to compensate for the fact that the predicted peak widths were associated to the half height of the peak and not the full profile. The combination of the predicted mass window (“ c ”), measured  m / z  value (“ b ”), and measured intensity (“ a ”) provided the necessary information to estimate the profile of mass peaks, thus moving from the centroided data to profile data. Calculations   All calculations were performed using a personal computer (PC) with Intel Core i7 CPU and 16 GB of RAM operating Ubuntu 20.04.2 LTS. All the data processing and statistical analysis were performed using julia language 1.5.3. Results and Discussion   Seven chromatograms consisting of 30,000 scans were employed for the model development, validation, and final testing. The signals within these scans were centroided resulting in 2.7 × 10 11  measurements of the mass peak widths at half-height, relative intensity (%), the mass (Da), and the retention factor (%). The latter three parameters were used for prediction of the first parameter via a random forest regression model. Additionally, an algorithm for prediction of mass peak profiles based on the developed model was developed.   Performance of the Centroiding Algorithm   The centroiding algorithm is self-adjusting and iterative, where for each iteration, one mass profile peak was converted to a centroid. During this process, the algorithm used the nominal resolution of the instrument as a first guess to estimate the mass peak width. This mass window was adjusted to the true values using the measured data. Prior to the application of the centroiding algorithm, all its parameters were optimized using 50 randomly selected mass peaks in two chromatograms. Moreover, these parameters, when optimized, were in close agreement with the parameters optimized for the self-adjusting feature detection algorithm. 16   The visual inspection of the output of the centroiding algorithm for one chromatogram resulted in around 8000 correctly detected centroid masses ( Figure S2 ), zero false positive identifications (i.e., noise being detected as signal), and 167 false negative identifications (i.e., true signal being identified as noise) ( Figure S3 ). This process was performed by plotting every single mass peak processed via the algorithm, which resulted in a total of around 11,000 figures (please see Code Availability), including true positives ( Figure S2 ), false negatives ( Figure S3 ), and true negatives ( Figure S4 ). The same chromatogram was processed via the centroiding algorithm implemented in the MZmine2 13  utilizing the same minimum intensity threshold (i.e., 1000 c/s). The direct comparison between the outputs of the two algorithms enabled us to assess the false detection rates of the MZmine2 method. The MZmine2 algorithm resulted in larger rates of false positive 35% while having false negative rates as low as 3% ( Figure S5 ). Overall, our algorithm resulted in both false positive and false negative rates ≤5%, which is smaller than the MZmine2 13  centroiding algorithm for false positives and is comparable for the rate of false negatives (i.e., a false positive rate of 35% and a false negative rate of 3%).   We also evaluated the impact of the  R 2  threshold and the signal to background ratio parameters on the rates of false detection. A list of 100 randomly selected mass peaks generated under optimized conditions was used as our reference. The same 100 peaks were reevaluated using a grid with a resolution of ten (i.e., ten steps) generated for each parameter. The  R 2  threshold ranged between 0 and 1 while the signal to background ratio ranged between 0 and 5. The detected peaks were compared to the reference list to assess the number of false detection cases (i.e., sum of false positive and negative cases). For  R 2  values of ≥0.9, the algorithm resulted in false detection cases ranging between 60 and 98 cases out of total evaluated 100 peaks, which was attributed to the extreme case scenario (i.e., perfect Gaussian fit) ( Figure S6 ). On the other hand, for signal to background ratios >2.5, the algorithm generated up to 100 cases of false detection out of the 100 evaluated peaks ( Figure S6 ), which was attributed to the fact that the mass peaks rarely meet this criterion. Expect for extreme cases, the algorithm appeared to be robust toward changes in these parameters. In fact, for  R 2  threshold set between 0.5 and 0.85 and signal to background ratio range of 1–2.5, the observed changes in the number of false detections were not statistically significant (Kruskal–Wallis test 40 p  ≤ 0.01) ( Figure S6 ).   The self-adjusting centroiding algorithm fared comparably in terms of the false negative rate to MZmine2 with the same parameter setting, while performing better in terms of the false positive rate. Moreover, the algorithm appeared to be robust in terms of the changes in the parameter settings. Finally, the algorithm generates a mass peak width for each centroided  m / z  value, which can be used during feature detection, componentization, and identification. Exploration of the Model Parameter Space   The centroiding algorithm employing optimized settings was used to generate the necessary parameters for the model building. Three parameters consisting of relative intensity (%), mass (Da), and the retention factor (%) were employed for the prediction of mass peak widths at half-heights via a random forest regression model. These parameters were selected based on the fact that they could be extracted automatically from the raw data, given their importance in prediction of mass peak widths. 1 , 14 , 41   The measured mass peak widths of the 2.7 × 10 11  profiles ranged from 3 to 80 mDa. More than 95% of the data used for our model had a mass peak width ranging between 3 and 20 mDa, regardless of the relative intensity or the ionization mode (i.e., ESI– or ESI+) ( Figure  2 ). This was in agreement with previously reported mass accuracies related to QToF instruments with a nominal mass resolution of 35,000. 4 , 16 , 27 , 41 , 42  We did not observe a statistically significant (i.e.,  p  ≤ 0.05) linear correlation between the relative intensity and the measured peak widths ( r  = 0.06), 43  which indicates that there is no direct relationship between these two parameters.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Distribution of 100,000 randomly selected measured mass peak widths (mDa) as a function of (a) relative intensity (%), (b) the  m / z  value (Da), and (c) the retention factor (%). The red points were measured in the negative mode(i.e., ESI−) while the blue points were measured in the positive mode(i.e., ESI+). An increase in the measured masses showed a slight increase in the measured peak widths with an  r  value of 0.46 ( p  ≤ 0.05) ( Figure  2 ). In this case also, the observed correlation was independent from the analysis mode (i.e., ESI– or ESI+). The observed correlation between these two parameters is in agreement with the nominal mass resolution and the set sampling rate of QToF instruments. 1 , 14  The observed correlation, even though significant, indicates that the  m / z  value alone is not able to describe the variance in the measured peak widths.   As with the relative intensity, the retention factor did not show a statistically significant correlation with the measured peak widths ( r  = 0.1) ( Figure  2 ). The observed trend indicated that the location of the peak in the chromatogram did not impact the mass peak width, suggesting the negligible impact of ion suppression on the mass accuracy. 1 , 14   Overall, for all three parameters, the ionization mode did not affect the measured mass peak widths ( Figure  2 ). Moreover, the observed weak relationship between the independent and dependent variables suggested that the conventional approaches such as principal component regression and/or partial least square regression may not be able to capture the observed variance in the measured mass peak widths, given their needs for the presence of correlation between the dependent and independent variables. Therefore, the use of a more sophisticated modeling strategy is warranted. Modeling   A regression model was developed and validated for the prediction of  m / z  peak widths at half-height, based on relative intensity (%), the mass (Da), and the retention factor (%) via a random forest modeling strategy. To assess the importance of each parameter, a model was generated including only one independent variable of the training set. Each model was then used for the prediction of the mass peak widths of the test set. The percentage variance explained in the predictions compared to the experimental data was used as a measure of variable importance. 38   The model with all three variables described ≈85% of variance in the test sets, whereas the individual variables descriptive power ranged from ≈46% for the  m / z  value to ≈6% for the retention factor ( Figures S7–S9 ). Given that none of the variables generated an explained variance ≤5%, we opted for the inclusion of all three variables in the model to be able to predict the mass peak widths with a higher level of accuracy. Moreover, we used the standard error of prediction, defined as the error divided by the measured values, as a means of assessing the quality and accuracy of the model outputs. The inclusion of all three parameters resulted in a statistically significant decrease in the average prediction error from 139 ( Figures S10 and S11 ) to 56%, which further indicated the importance of all three parameters ( Figures S7–S9 ).   The final model resulted in an average prediction error of ±6 mDa (56%), for ≈90% of the test set ( Figure  3 ). The largest prediction errors of up to 200% were observed for the peak widths between 8 and 15 mDa. On the other hand, for peak widths ≤8 and ≥15 mDa, the average observed prediction error was around 47%. Moreover, for peak widths ≥35 mDa, the model appeared to consistently underestimate the measured peak widths. However, even in this case, the average prediction error did not exceed 50%. We also compared the model average prediction error to the estimates of mass peak widths using the constant resolution and the accurate mass. The average prediction error of 56% via model was 6 times smaller than the average error of the resolution-based estimates.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   (a) Distribution of 10,000 randomly selected measured mass peak widths (mDa) from the test set vs the predicted mass peak widths and (b) the distribution of the prediction errors in mDa. The red points were measured in the negative mode(i.e. ESI−) while the blue points were measured i