>Material and methods   Bacteria isolation and identification   Bacterial strain was recovered from the sediments collected at a depth of 0.5 m using a van Veen grab sampler at Araçá Beach, São Sebastião, SP, Brazil (23°48'53.83"S; 45°24'26.83"O). The sediment sample was diluted in sterile seawater, heated to 55  o C for 10 min and streaked onto a semi-solid nutritious medium (A1), composed of 1% soluble starch, 0.4% yeast extract, 0.4% peptone and 1.8% bacteriological agar made up with reconstituted sea water. To reduce fungal contamination, cycloheximide (10 mg L -1 ) was added. Access to the collection site for this study was approved and registered with the Sistema Nacional de Gestão do Patrimônio Genético e do Conhecimento Tradicional Associado [SisGen # A0031D5] and the Sistema de Autorização e Informação em Biodiversidade [SISBIO # 49951–4], both within the Brazilian Environmental Ministry. It has also been authorized by Instituto Florestal, within the São Paulo State Environmental Secretary [process # 260108–004.258/2018].   The bacteria grew between 12 and 90 days between 26–28°C and the phenotypic differences of the colonies including color, brightness, shape, texture, among others were the main characteristic considered to isolate them by transferring to a new dish with fresh media. The isolated strain was cultured on A1 semi-solid medium and preserved in growth broth supplemented with 50% glycerol in reconstituted sea water, aliquoted in cryogenic flasks and frozen at -80°C.   The strain, codified by BRB081, was identified as  Streptomyces  sp. based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing (GenBank accession number JACVQE010000000) followed by comparison to the sequences present in the Ezbiocloud database for type species and also at NCBI ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ) using Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST). The methodology used was previously detailed described by Velasco-Alzate et al., 2019 [ 29 ]. Bacteria cultivation   Strain BRB081 was cultivated for 1, 2, 3 and 7 days in Erlenmeyer flasks (125 mL) containing 40 mL of liquid media at 28°C and 180 rpm. Six different liquid media were used: (1)  Starch Casein Broth–SCB  (per L): soluble starch, 10.0 g; NaCl, 2.0 g; casein, 0.3 g; KNO 3 , 2.0 g; K 2 HPO 4 , 2.0 g; MgSO 4 ∙7H 2 O, 0.05 g; CaCO 3 , 0.02 g; FeSO 4 ∙7H 2 O, 0.01 g; synthetic sea salt (Red Sea ® ), 36.0 g; deionized H 2 O, 1.0 q.s./L. (2)  R5M  (per L): glucose, 10.0 g; yeast extract, 5.0 g; Casamino Acids, 0.1 g; MgCl 2 ∙6H 2 O, 10.12 g; trace salts solution (ZnCl 2 , 40.0 mg L -1 ; FeCl 3 ∙6H 2 O, 200.0 mg L -1 ; CuCl 2 ∙2H 2 O, 10.0 mg L -1 ; MnCl 2 , 10.0 mg L -1 ; Na 2 B 4 O 7 ∙10H 2 O, 10.0 mg L -1 ; (NH 4 ) 6 Mo 7 O 24 ∙4H 2 O, 10.0 mg L -1 ), 2.0 mL; synthetic sea salt (Red Sea ® ), 36.0 g; deionized H 2 O, 1.0 q.s./L. (3)  ISP2  (per L): yeast extract, 4.0 g; malt extract, 10.0 g; dextrose, 4.0 g; synthetic sea salt (Red Sea ® ), 36.0 g; deionized H 2 O, 1.0 q.s./L. (4)  Potato Dextrose –PD (per L): potatoes infusion, 200.0 g; glucose, 20.0 g; synthetic sea salt (Red Sea ® ), 36.0 g; deionized H 2 O, 1.0 q.s./L. (5)  A1  (per L): soluble starch, 10.0 g; yeast extract, 4.0 g; peptone, 2.0 g; synthetic sea salt (Red Sea ® ), 36.0 g; deionized H 2 O, 1.0 q.s./L. (6)  PC-1  (per L) [ 28 ]: soluble starch, 10.0 g; peptone, 10.0 g; meat extract, 10.0 g; sugar cane molasses, 10.0 g; synthetic sea salt (Red Sea ® ), 36.0 g; deionized H 2 O, 1.0 q.s./L. For all media the pH was adjusted between 7.8 and 8.2 using HCl 1.0 mol L -1  or NaOH 1.0 mol L -1 . Extract preparation   After 1, 2, 3 and 7 days of cultivation, broths were centrifuged at 9,000 rpm for 10 min to separate the mycelium from the supernatant. Mycelium was extracted twice with 10 mL of MeOH/Acetone (1:1) for 10 min with a centrifugation step at 9,000 rpm for 10 min between each extraction, and then pooled together. Supernatant was extracted twice using 20 mL of EtOAc at 190 rpm for 30 min. Thus, two extracts were obtained per sample, one from the mycelium and one from the supernatant,  i . e . the culture broth. Sterile culture media were used as controls (blanks of each culture media). After extraction, samples were dried in an Eppendorf ®  Concentrator Plus system under vacuum and the resulting material diluted to 1.0 mg L -1  using MeOH HPLC grade. LC-MS/MS analyses   Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analyses were carried out on a HPLC (Shimadzu ® ) coupled to a mass spectrometer ESI-IT (Amazon SL, Bruker Daltonics), fitted with an electrospray ionization source and ion-trap analyzer. Chromatographic method consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in H 2 O) and B (0.1% formic acid in MeOH), starting at 5% up to 100% of B in 30 min followed by a hold of 100% of B for 5 min, using a C18 column (Phenomenex ®  Luna, 5 μm, 4.6 x 250 mm). The method employed a flow of 1.0 mL min -1 , 15 μL injection volume and column temperature of 40  o C. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, monitoring a mass range from 100 to 1500 atomic mass units (amu), capillary voltage of 3500 V, end plate offset of 500 V, nebulizer at 60 psi, dry gas 10 L min -1  and dry temperature at 320°C, using the untargeted mode (fragmentation at MS 2  level using a ramp of collision energy from 50 up to 75 eV). MS data processing   The LC-MS data was converted from.d to.mzXML using MSConvert software. Converted files were processed in three different ways: (i) for search in the spectral library and molecular networking from GNPS platform ( gnps.ucsd.edu ) for identification of known compounds and analogs [ 30 ]; (ii) using MZMine 2 software for qualitative chemical barcoding and (iii) to compare the relative amount of surugamides among samples. Molecular networking–GNPS   Converted mzXML files were uploaded to GNPS server ( massive.ucsd.edu ) using the cross-platform FTP client FileZilla. To construct the molecular network, the precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 0.8 and 0.2 Da respectively. Advanced network options were set as follows: minimum pairs cosine: 0.7; network TopK: 10; maximum connected component size: 100; maximum matched fragment ions: 4 and minimum cluster size: 2. For library search, a minimum of 4 matching peaks was chosen with a score threshold of 0.65. Default values were utilized for all other parameters. Construction of molecular network was performed using software Cytoscape, versions 2.8.2 and 3.6.1 [ 31 ]. Full molecular network colored by extracted broth/mycelium matrices and by culture media are in  S1  and  S2  Figs, respectively. MZmine 2 software processing and chemical barcoding   LC−MS profiles were also analyzed using chemical barcoding and principal component analysis as previously described [ 32 ]. All files were processed using MZmine 2 [ 33 ], where the converted files were submitted to the steps of mass detection, chromatogram building, deisotoping, alignment and exportation. Mass detection step generates a list of masses for each scan in the analysis. For this step, it was chosen a noise level value of 5.0x10 5  counts s -1  by comparison with MeOH and media blanks [ 32 ]. Peaks presenting a lower intensity were therefore not detected and not included in the mass list for further analysis. The next step, chromatogram building, builds a chromatogram for each mass that can be detected in all scans from the mass list generated in the previous step. Then, deisotoping step was carried out for the selection of the representative ions in isotopic patterns. The last step in MZmine 2 software was the alignment mode, where  m/z  and retention time (r t ) data were combined and all samples aligned in a single file. The alignment mode allows the conversion of a three-dimensional dataset to a two-dimensional dataset, where buckets are created with the peaks areas. For the peaks that are not present in the sample, a value of zero was assigned. Finally, the aligned peaks were exported as a.csv (comma separated value) file containing retention time, mass-to-charge ratio and peak area of all detected compounds in all samples. Relative quantification analysis of surugamides production over cultivation days and among media was performed using the peak areas of compounds retrieved in this step.   Standardization and artifact suppression were carried out in Microsoft ®  Excel 2010. First, presence-absence standardization was achieved transforming the dataset in a binary pattern, where peak areas greater than zero were given a value of one and peak areas equal to zero remained zero. For visualization of the chemical barcode, values of “1” within the dataset are shown as black ticks, while values of “0” are omitted. Ions detected in MeOH and media blanks were removed from samples for artifact suppression.   The chemical barcode is the full view of the table retrieved from MZMine 2, in which the main color groups distinguish the extracts obtained from either broth (orange tones) or mycelium (blue tones). Each colored strip within the color group indicates the extracts obtained after 1, 2, 3 or 7 days of growth; and each horizontal line of ticks within a strip represents a growth medium utilized for strain growth. PCA analysis   Statistical analysis was carried out using The Unscrambler (Camo software). Principal component analysis was performed for comparison and for identification of outliers with distinguishable chemical profile. Genomic analysis   The genomic DNA of BRB081 was extracted using the Wizard ® Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega Corporation, Fitchburg, USA), according to the manufacturer's recommendations, and the quality of the extraction was verified by agarose gel electrophoresis. The genomic DNA was sequenced by the Macrogen laboratory (South Korea, Seoul), using the HiSeq System platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, USA). The Geneious R11 software (Biomatters, New Zealand) was used to assemble the reads into contigs, which were reordered based on synteny conservation by the MeDuSa server version 1.6 [ 34 ] using the complete genomes of  Streptomyces albidoflavus  J1074,  Streptomyces sampsonii  KJ40 and  Streptomyces koyangisis  VK-A60T as a reference. In both stages of assembly, data quality was assessed using the gVolante 1.2.1 software [ 35 ] with the choice of the BUSCO V1 pipeline [ 36 ]. Finally, the AntiSMASH 5.0 bacterial version software [ 37 ] was used to define biosynthetic genes clusters of secondary metabolites in the assembled genome of  Streptomyces  sp. BRB081 (GenBank accession number JACVQE010000000). The threshold of “rigor” parameter was set to “high”, to present only well-defined clusters and containing all the necessary genes. Cytotoxicity evaluation–MTT assay   Cytotoxic activity was evaluated by the colorimetric MTT assay using a colon adenocarcinoma cell line (HCT-116 ATCC CCL-247). Cells were plated in a 96-wells plate at 0.6x10 4  cells/well (3x10 4  cells/mL in 200 μL of medium). After 24h, crude extracts (10.0 mg mL -1  in DMSO) were added in wells for a final concentration of 50 μg mL -1 . Plates were incubated for 72h and the supernatant substituted for culture medium containing MTT ((3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) at 0.5 mg mL -1 . After 3h, supernatant was removed, the plate dried and the precipitate containing formazan dissolved in 150 μL of DMSO. Finally, absorbance was measured at 570 nm [ 38 ]. The experiment was performed in duplicate. Doxorubicin and DMSO were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. Activities for each extract were expressed as percentage considering the positive control as 100% of inhibition. Extracts were considered cytotoxic when inhibited over 75% cell growth at the concentration tested. Results and discussion   GNPS is an open access web-based mass spectrometry platform that provides several tools to analyze MS data. The platform allows for annotation of compounds through spectral library search and organization of compounds (detected ions) into families of molecules with molecular networking [ 39 ]. In our work, we chose LC-MS/MS analysis and GNPS tools for data visualization and annotation of compounds through library search.  Fig 1  shows the molecular network and the clusters with at least one library hit, along with their annotations.   Fig 1. Molecular network constructed with LC-MS/MS data obtained from the crude extracts produced by  Streptomyces  sp. BRB081 in six different media during seven days of cultivation.     Open in a new tab   Clusters of molecular families are depicted twice and show the detected compounds in broth and mycelium when both parts are separately extracted and across different media. Nodes corresponding to the spectral library match are colored in pink. The structures shown are related to annotated compounds. Since GNPS platform provides annotation through comparison of fragmentation patterns, it is possible to suggest the structure not only of the compounds present in a sample, but also of analogues that show similar fragments in the mass spectrum. Therefore, new derivatives of known classes of compounds are detected and organized in clusters with other substances with similar structure.   Desferrioxiamine E (nocardamine) was annotated ( Fig 1 ) along with four other desferrioxiamines (Desf, Desf-A1, Desf-D2 and Desf-03). These compounds are siderophores (iron chelating agents) commonly biosynthesized by actinobacteria through siderophore synthase superfamily pathway [ 40 ]. Furthermore, these compounds were mainly produced in PD medium. Studies suggest that this class of compounds has a role in bacterial growth and development [ 41 ] and may show antibacterial activity against mycobacteria [ 42 ]. A cluster of fatty amides was found containing octadecanamide ( Fig 1 ). This compound was previously reported from a  Bacillus  sp. strain [ 43 ], although no report on bioactivity was found. Xanthurenic acid (XA), a metabolite produced both by Gram positive and negative bacteria, was also identified ( Fig 1 ) [ 44 ]. XA is derived from tryptophan catabolism [ 45 ] and is considered an endogenous cell death factor which accelerates aging and disease development when accumulated in cells [ 46 ]. A cluster of diketopiperazines ( Fig 1 ) allowed for annotation of the tryptophan-based diketopiperazines (DKPs) cyclo-(alanyl-tryptophanyl), cyclo-(phenylalanyl-tryptophanyl) and cyclo-(prolyl-tryptophanyl) (brevianamide F). DKPs are natural occurring nitrogen compounds produced by several marine microorganisms, including  Streptomyces  species [ 47 ]. These dimeric peptides present several biological activities, including antifouling [ 48 ], antiviral [ 49 ], antimicrobial and cytotoxic [ 50 ], among others. Tryptophan derivatives like the DKPs identified are especially interesting for presenting an indole moiety, which is common in medicinal chemistry and may influence several biological activities [ 51 ,  52 ]. Brevianamide F is also reported as a potential compound for treatment of cardiovascular dysfunction [ 53 ]. As shown, fatty amides, XA and DKPs were mainly produced in A1 and PC-1 media. An interesting cluster of the cyclic octapeptides surugamides was also detected ( Fig 1 ), with the annotation of surugamide A and one or more isomers of surugamides B-E (all protonated analogues of  m/z  899.1 were not distinguishable by mass spectrometry). It is possible to observe that, in general, they were produced in all media tested herein. These compounds were first isolated from a  Streptomyces  sp. strain and shown to be cathepsin B inhibitors [ 28 ]. Another cyclic octapeptide, champacyclin, has been reported as an isomer of surugamide A, differing in just two amino acid residues [ 54 ]. It is worth mentioning that several clusters found in the molecular network did not show any matches within databases, thus revealing a profusion of potentially unknown metabolites produced by this single strain.   Molecular networking provided a general profile of compounds produced by the  Streptomyces  sp. strain over time. In order to investigate if a compound is kept intracellular or secreted, samples from broth and mycelium extractions were colored in orange and blue, respectively, in the molecular network ( Fig 2A ). Furthermore, to identify which culture medium is better suited for the production of a specific metabolite, extracts obtained from BRB081 growth in each of the six culture media were also differently colored ( Fig 2B ).  Fig 2  shows examples of two clusters, the surugamides (left), with two putatively new analogues, and another cluster, with no compounds identified (right). In both cases, it is possible to discern the matrix (broth/mycelium) that gives improved yields of these compounds ( Fig 2A ), as well as the best culture medium for their production ( Fig 2B ). Extraction of broth and mycelium independently usually provides clearer extracts. Thus, determining whether a target compound is only found in a specific part may guide towards a more efficient extraction and facilitate further isolation steps.   Fig 2.     Open in a new tab   Clusters from the molecular network of the identified octapeptides surugamides (left) and of putatively new unknown metabolites (right).  a) color-code discriminates nodes occurring in extracts obtained from the different matrix (broth/mycelium); b) color-code discriminates nodes occurring in extracts obtained from the different culture medium. Fig 2A  shows that the putative unknown compounds from the cluster in the right were found only in the broth, while the surugamides (cluster in the left), with the exception of ion of  m/z  871.1, found only in the broth, were detected in extracts obtained from both matrices. Still, analyzing the extracted ion chromatograms for surugamides showed in  Fig 3 , at seven days of cultivation in SCB medium, these compounds presented a greater intensity and, consequently, higher concentration in the broth rather than in the mycelium extract. Despite published works reporting otherwise [ 28 ,  55 ], extraction of culture broth appears to raise the yield of surugamides.   Fig 3.     Open in a new tab   Extracted-ion chromatogram from LC-MS analyses of broth (red) and mycelium (blue) extracts (SCB medium– 7 days).  Surugamides: 1 at 22.0 min, 871.1 Da; 2 at 22.4 min, 885.1 Da; 3 at 22.9 min, 899.1 Da; 4 at 23.5 min, 913.1 Da. This approach can be applied to compare compound production in different culture media. For example, the molecular network showed that the putatively new cluster on the right ( Fig 2B ) was only produced in SCB and PD media, but without quantitative information. Despite the interesting group of compounds, possibly further optimization of cultivation parameters will be necessary for monitoring and isolation of compounds prior scaling-up.   This shows the importance of checking the relative amount of compounds among samples, since molecular networks disregard peak areas. Integration of peaks provides a relative quantitation of a specific compound among samples and allows the selection of samples containing the highest concentration of a target metabolite. For example, surugamide A ( m/z  913.1, [M+H] + ) and the surugamide B-E isomers ( m/z  899.1, [M+H] + ) were detected in all media, while the putatively new surugamides of  m/z  885.1 ([M+H] + ) and  m/z  871.1 ([M+H] + ) were detected, respectively, in all media excepted ISP2 and only in SCB, R5M and PD. Since the mycelium was shown to be an inferior source of surugamides ( Fig 3 ), only samples from broth extractions were considered for comparison of the relative amount of these compounds. Similarly, mycelium extractions from all media were poorer sources of surugamides. After plotting the peak areas for the surugamides detected in all media for each day of extraction, the maximum production of all analogues was achieved after seven days of cultivation in SCB medium ( Fig 4 ). Notably, extracts obtained in SCB medium showed a much higher amount of surugamides than those in PC-1, previously reported for surugamide production [ 28 ]. A recent study compared the production of surugamide A between two  Streptomyces  strains (J1074, recovered from a soil sample, and SM17, isolated from a marine sponge) using OSMAC and genome mining approach. Despite their sourcing from different environments, both strains belong to the same phylogroup and the biosynthetic gene cluster for surugamides ( sur  BGC) was found in their genomes. A search for  sur  BGC homologs in genomes available in the Genbank revealed that all five microorganisms that have this BGC are classified as  Streptomyces albidoflavus  and belong to the same phylogroup of J1074 and SM17 strains, suggesting the  sur  BGC might be exclusive to  S .  albidoflavus  species. Moreover, a comparison of whole genome regions that contained  sur  BGCs of each isolate revealed that saline environment-derived  sur  BGCs likely share more genetic similarities amongst each other, rather than with those from terrestrial environments. The OSMAC approach surprisingly showed that the strain from the marine source produced higher yields of surugamide A in all tested conditions (with and without salt), reaching yields up to >13-fold higher in one of the tested media [ 56 ].   Fig 4. Surugamides production over 1, 2, 3 and 7 days of cultivation.