>METHODS   Solvents, plant material and crude extract preparation   Details regarding the solvents used and sample preparation methods are provided in the Supplementary Material SM-1. Information on solvent sources, purity levels, vegetal material, maceration extraction conditions and sample-handling procedures are all included. Data acquisition and sample analysis   Chromatographic analysis was performed on an ultra-performance liquid chromatography–quadrupole time-of-flight tandem MS instrument (Xevo qTOF MS, Waters Corp., Milford, USA). Details concerning the QC preparation, chromatographic column, method details and mobile phase system information are described in Supplementary Material SM-2. The electrospray ionization (ESI) source operated in both positive and negative ion modes to capture a comprehensive range of analytes. MS E , a type of DIA analysis, was conducted using MassLynx™ (v4.2; Waters Corp., Milford, USA). The mass spectrometer and MS E  acquisition parameters are fully detailed in Supplementary Material SM-2. Public samples dataset   We validated our pipeline using a publicly available LC-HRMS-DIA/MS E  dataset of a marine actinobacteria extract. This dataset, as described in the publication by Carnevale  et al. , was enriched with a pool of 20 authentic standards [ 17 ]. The chosen standards encompass a wide range of antimicrobial and chemotherapeutic agents, along with naturally occurring compounds, thereby providing a diverse chemical profile suitable for comprehensive analysis. The dataset was obtained from the MassIVE repository (MSV000088316) and is accessible through the Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking (GNPS) platform. Data processing and annotation workflow   The KNIME workflow and subsequent open software in the pipeline were executed on a Windows 11 desktop computer with a 12-core (8 used) 64-bit Intel Core i7-12700—2.10 GHz processor with 32 GB of RAM. The GPU consisted of an NVIDIA T1000 8GB. KNIME in-house database workflow   To perform the experiments, we have developed a robust workflow to establish an integrated ‘in-house’ database within Mzmine and MS-DIAL data processing software using the KNIME (University of Konstanz, Zurich, Switzerland, version 4.6.5). KNIME ( www.knime.org ) is an open-source workflow system with a graphical user interface built on a set of nodes known as ‘extensions’ that process data and transmit it via connections between those nodes. Thus KNIME provides a simple visual workbench that allows scientists to build and visualize complex workflows [ 45 ,  46 ]. The workflow is online and is publicly available to use ( https://hub.knime.com/-/spaces/-/~8bZEbbknV8tVptea/current-state/ ). Details regarding our custom ‘in-house’ DB are provided in the SM-3. The ‘in-house’ database allows level 3 annotation following the guidelines of the MSI [ 30 ,  31 ]. However, it holds more confidence because the ‘in-house’ DB supports fast annotation of previous metabolites previously isolated in the family or genus of the study. MS data conversion   To ensure compatibility, accessibility and comparability, the raw Waters MS E  data from both independent datasets were converted to the widely used .mzML format using the recently developed open-source tool Waters2mzML 1.2.0, available on GitHub ( https://github.com/AnP311/Waters2mzML ) (SM-3). The generated .mzML files can be readily processed using Mzmine 3 and MS-DIAL software for further analyses and interpretation. Mzmine 3 data processing and analysis   The raw data containing peak area and  R t – m/z  pairs of 71  Ocotea  samples (60  Ocotea  spp. sample extracts, four QCs, four blanks and three VI sample extracts [replicates]) and 17 samples from actinobacterial extract (replicates and blanks), previously converted to .mzML format, were imported into MZmine 3.4.27 ( https://mzmine.github.io/ ; MZmine Development Team). One QC and one blank sample replicate were excluded from processing due to higher shifts in the  R t  compared to other replicates. The detected peaks were deconvoluted, isotopes were eliminated, identical peaks in the different chromatograms were aligned, the remaining gaps were filled, duplicated features were filtered and the blank chromatograms were subtracted. Then, the features were annotated according to their monoisotopic masses. Data from each ionization mode were processed separately. The data processing parameters are fully detailed in the Supplementary material SM-4.   The treated MS data was then exported in .xlxs format. The Mass Bank of North America (MoNA) ( https://mona.fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/ ) was used for manual spectral comparisons and fragment MS data matches. These manual annotations were listed as level 2 according to the current standards initiative [ 31 ,  37 ,  38 ,  47 ]. The chosen modules and algorithms of processing were the standard ones, although this software offers an array of different modern tools that can be used to improve data processing results [ 6 ,  11 ,  18 ]. MS-DIAL data processing and analysis   The ‘Analysis Base File’ (.abf) format, generated using Reifys Abf converter software ( https://www.reifycs.com/AbfConverter ), is a traditional data format for MS-DIAL MS E  data processing aimed at MN implementation. However, to ensure maximum compatibility with other software, we chose a more universal approach by converting the data into .mzML format, enabling simultaneous MZmine and MS-DIAL usage and MS data comparison.   The converted .mzML data were successfully loaded into MS-DIAL version 4.9.2 ( http://prime.psc.riken.jp/compms/msdial/main.html ) for data processing, following a procedure similar to the one used with MZmine 3. In MS-DIAL, we configured the project settings according to our specific data requirements: ionization mode (soft ionization; chromatography; conventional DIA-all-ions method-AIF), the experiment file (available in the Supplementary Material) and data type (i.e. centroid MS 1  and MS/MS data). It is also necessary to process positive and negative ion modes data separately. For data processing, the parameters are fully detailed in the Supplementary Material (SM-5). Subsequently, the data were uploaded to the GNPS server using the open FTP tool named WinSCP ( https://winscp.net/eng/download.php ). All the other existing parameters not mentioned were left at software default. Molecular networking and metabolite annotation analysis   Metabolite annotation in our study involved a combination of automated and manual approaches (detailed in SM-6). Post-data processing is performed by exporting the results from MS-DIAL, i.e. ‘MS2 File’ (.mgf), ‘Feature Quantification Table’ (.txt) and the metadata to the GNPS ( https://gnps.ucsd.edu/ ) environment. The metadata file was built in .txt format with the filenames and the respective attributes of species, sample type, region/state of plant collection and endemic occurrence in Brazil. These files are available online on the Zenodo platform ( https://zenodo.org/records/10383866 ). FBMN was generated using the respective workflow in the GNPS ecosystem [ 48 ] using FBMN parameters described in SM-6. Most of the metabolites were annotated at levels 2 and 3 according to MSI levels. All combined FBMN jobs with level 3 annotated metabolites are listed in  Tables S3  and  S4  and can be found on the Zenodo platform ( https://zenodo.org/records/10383866 ). Molecular networking visualization and interpretation   The generated networks from GNPS were downloaded and visualized using Cytoscape network software (version 3.8.2). The metadata-rich GNPS table, when opened in Cytoscape, can be exported as a .csv file. This facilitates semi-automated integration with the ‘in-house’ annotation. Subsequently, the annotated table can be reimported into the software to perform MN investigation and analysis.   Key Points     An open, integrated workflow is presented that leverages both universal data formats (.mzML) and open-source software tools (KNIME, MZmine, MS-DIAL and GNPS) for enhanced DIA-MS E  data handling.   The workflow demonstrated its applicability by characterizing  Ocotea  crude plant and marine actinobacterial extract, revealing the chemical diversity of different natural product classes.   By promoting open science, the pipeline provides a framework to advance DIA-MS E  data handling, transparency, reproducibility and analysis through integrative approaches, overcoming the limitations of commercial solutions.   We aim to propel the field forward, empowering researchers to achieve more accessible MS E  data processing, with a reliable annotation process, leveraging the potential of DIA-MS to drive the community toward further improvements.   Supplementary Material   Revised_supplemental_material_bbae013     revised_supplemental_material_bbae013.docx  (10.4MB, docx)    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   The authors extend their gratitude to the José Badini OUPR herbarium (UFOP—Federal University of Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais—MG, Brazil) and II-Leopoldo Krieger CESJ herbarium (UFJF—Federal University of Juiz de Fora—Minas Gerais, MG, Brazil), for generously providing the  Ocotea  spp. material. Their contributions were invaluable to the applicability case of this research. Author Biographies     Albert Katchborian-Neto , a doctoral candidate at the Institute of Chemistry of the Federal University of Alfenas, Brazil, focuses his research on natural products by applying mass spectrometry and machine learning to metabolomics for exploring pharmacological applications with particular interest in the psychedelics science.     Matheus F. Alves , a master’s student at the Institute of Chemistry of the Federal University of Alfenas, Brazil, focuses his research on mass spectrometry-based metabolomics, exploring psychedelic natural products and biodiversity bioprospecting studies.   Paula C.P. Bueno  is a scientist at the Leibniz Institute of Vegetable and Ornamental Crops (IGZ), Germany, and a guest researcher at the Chemistry Institute of the Federal University of Alfenas, Brazil. Her research line is focused on plant metabolomics, ecophysiology and chemical ecology.   Karen de Jesus Nicácio , a professor at the Chemistry Department at the Federal University of Mato Grosso, Brazil, researches natural products by isolating and identifying metabolites from plants and microorganisms using classical and modern metabolomics approaches.   Miller S. Ferreira  is a post-doctoral researcher at the Institute of Chemistry of the Federal University of Alfenas, Brazil. His research interests include chemometrics and machine learning techniques applied to the chemistry of natural products.   Tiago B. Oliveira  is a professor at the Department of Pharmacy of the Federal University of Sergipe, Brazil. His research interests are green chemistry methods including metabolomics, biochemometrics and virtual screenings to obtain food safety.   Henrique Barbosa  is a doctoral student at the Center of Natural Sciences and Humanities at the Federal University of ABC, Brazil, focusing his research on bioprospecting natural resources using computational methods.   Michael Murgu  is a senior scientist at Waters Corporation, São Paulo. He has expertise in metabolite characterization, tandem mass spectrometry and high-performance liquid chromatography, to drive innovation in mass spectrometry technologies.   Ana C.C. de Paula Ladvocat  is a professor at the Department of Pharmacy at the Federal University of Juiz de Fora. Her interests are mainly in stem cells for regenerative medicine, modeling diseases and assessing pharmacological properties.   Danielle F. Dias , a professor at the Institute of Chemistry of the Federal University of Alfenas, Brazil, works with the synthesis and characterization of novel bioactive compounds with analgesic, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial and antiparasitic activities.   Marisi G. Soares , a professor at the Institute of Chemistry of the Federal University of Alfenas, Brazil, researches natural products using chromatography, nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry for structural characterization and identification.   João H.G. Lago  is a professor in the Center of Natural Sciences and Humanities at the Federal University of ABC, Brazil. His research interests involve the discovery of bioactive natural products, especially those with antiparasitic, anti-inflammatory or anticancer activity.   Daniela A. Chagas-Paula , a professor at the Institute of Chemistry of the Federal University of Alfenas, Brazil, focuses her research on natural products chemistry and implementation of metabolomics, biochemometric modeling and pharmacological evaluations, with additional interests in the biochemical basis of Parkinson’s disease. Contributor Information   Albert Katchborian-Neto,  Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Alfenas, 37130-001, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil.   Matheus F Alves,  Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Alfenas, 37130-001, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil.   Paula C P Bueno,  Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Alfenas, 37130-001, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil;  Leibniz Institute of Vegetable and Ornamental Crops (IGZ), Theodor-Echtermeyer-Weg 1, 14979, Großbeeren, Germany.   Karen de Jesus Nicácio,  Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Mato Grosso, 14040-901, Cuiabá, Mato Grosso, Brazil.   Miller S Ferreira,  Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Alfenas, 37130-001, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil.   Tiago B Oliveira,  Department of Pharmacy, Federal University of Sergipe, 49100-000, São Cristóvão, Sergipe, Brazil.   Henrique Barbosa,  Center of Natural Sciences and Humanities, Federal University of ABC, 09210-180, Santo Andre, São Paulo, Brazil.   Michael Murgu,  Waters Corporation, Alameda Tocantins 125, Alphaville, 06455-020, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.   Ana C C de Paula Ladvocat,  Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, 36036-900, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil.   Danielle F Dias,  Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Alfenas, 37130-001, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil.   Marisi G Soares,  Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Alfenas, 37130-001, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil.   João H G Lago,  Center of Natural Sciences and Humanities, Federal University of ABC, 09210-180, Santo Andre, São Paulo, Brazil.   Daniela A Chagas-Paula,  Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Alfenas, 37130-001, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS   A.K.N. and D.A.C.P. designed the pipeline. A.K.N., M.F.A. and D.A.C.P. wrote the draft paper. M.M. performed the high-resolution DIA-MS experiments. A.K.N. and M.F.A. performed MS data conversion. A.K.N., M.S.F. and T.B.O. developed the KNIME workflow. A.K.N., M.F.A., M.S.F. and K.J.N. performed  Ocotea  data curation. A.K.N., K.J.N., M.F.A., M.S.F. and P.C.P.B. performed data processing. A.K.N. and, M.F.A. performed the FBMN experiments. A.K.N., J.H.G.L., K.J.N., M.F.A., M.G.S., H.B. and D.A.C.P. aided in gas-phase fragmentation reactions elucidation. A.C.C.P.L., A.K.N., M.F.A., M.S.F., P.C.P.B., T.B.O., H.B., M.G.S. and D.F.D. aided in the construction of the manuscript tables, preparation of the figures and report of annotation standards report. A.K.N., A.C.C.P.L., K.J.N., J.H.G.L., D.F.D., M.F.A., M.G.S., H.B., M.M., M.S.F., P.C.P.B., T.B.O. and D.A.C.P. participated in data analysis, interpretation, discussion and revision. All authors have read the manuscript. FUNDING   This work received financial support from the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES Foundation, Brazil), finance code 001; Minas Gerais State Research Foundation (FAPEMIG, Brazil), finances codes: APQ-05218-23, APQ-00544-23, APQ-02353-17, APQ-00207-18 and BPD-00760-22; National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq, Brazil) finances codes 408115/2023-8, 316204/2021-8 and 406837/2021-0 for financial support; São Paulo State Research Foundation (FAPESP, Brazil), finances codes: 2021/02789-7 e 2023/12447-1. DATA AVAILABILITY   The  Ocotea  dataset of the current study was deposited to the Mass Spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) repository. The data that support the findings of this study are available at ftp:// MSV000093006@massive.ucsd.edu  under the registry code MSV000093006. Guidelines for files submitted to MassIVE for public access can be found online ( https://massive.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/static/massive.jsp ). ADDITIONAL INFORMATION   Accompanying information supplements this paper online at Zenodo open digital library:  https://zenodo.org/records/10383866 . References       1.  Gaudêncio SP, Pereira F. Dereplication: racing to speed up the natural products discovery process. Nat Prod Rep 2015;32:779–810.   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     2.  Vereyken L, Dillen L, Vreeken RJ, et al.  High-resolution mass spectrometry quantification: impact of differences in data processing of centroid and continuum data. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2019;30:203–12.   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3.  Yuliana ND, Khatib A, Choi YH, Verpoorte R. Metabolomics for bioactivity assessment of natural products. Phytother Res 2011;25:157–69.   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     4.  K de J N, Ferreira MS, Katchborian-Neto A, et al.  Anti-inflammatory markers of hops cultivars ( Humulus lupulus  L.) evaluated by untargeted metabolomics strategy. Chem Biodivers 2022;19(4):e202100966.   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     5.  Valmori M, Marie V, Fenaille F, et al.  Recent methodological developments in data-dependent analysis and data-independent analysis workflows for exhaustive lipidome coverage. Front Anal Sci 2023;3:1–9.  [ Google Scholar ]     6.  Alka O, Shanthamoorthy P, Witting M, et al.  DIAMetAlyzer allows automated false-discovery rate-controlled analysis for data-independent acquisition in metabolomics. Nat Commun 2022;13:1–9.   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     7.  Wang R, Yin Y, Zhu ZJ. Advancing untargeted metabolomics using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry technology. Anal Bioanal Chem 2019;411:4349–57.   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     8.  Rosnack KJ, Reid MJ, Ladak A, et al.  Screening solution using the software platform UNIFI: an integrated workflow by waters. ACS Symp Ser 2016;1242:155–72.  [ Google Scholar ]     9.  Naz S, Gallart-Ayala H, Reinke SN, et al.  Development of a liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry metabolomics method with high specificity for metabolite identification using all ion fragmentation acquisition. Anal Chem 2017;89:7933–42.   [ DOI ] [