>Materials and Methods   Software   We developed our feature detection algorithm in C++ within the OpenMS open-source framework for computational mass spectrometry, 15  version 2.1. Internally, our software makes use of the OpenSWATH toolset for DIA data analysis 17  and of the LIBSVM C library, 18  version 3.12. The two libraries are included in or come bundled with OpenMS, respectively. In the analysis of the benchmark data set (see below), we used several of the executable tools provided by OpenMS for various data processing tasks. For downstream data analysis we used the R environment for statistical computing, 19  versions 3.3.0 and 3.3.2., and especially the MSstats R package, 20  version 3.6.0, for quantification on the protein level. Benchmark Data Set   We evaluated our algorithm based on data from the iPRG-2015 study. 21  The data set consists of four biological samples, analyzed in three technical replicates (12 LC–MS/MS runs in total). The samples contain yeast cell lysate with spike-ins of six different purified proteins at varying concentrations. LC–MS/MS data were acquired on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive orbitrap instrument, then centroided and converted to mzML using the ProteoWizard software. We downloaded the data in mzML format from the study repository ( ftp://iprg_study:ABRF329@ftp.peptideatlas.org ).   This data set had been analyzed by Zhang and colleagues for their publication on the DeMix-Q workflow, which included a benchmark of multiple other software tools for label-free quantification. 14  Information about the spike-in proteins and the amounts used was taken from supplementary table 1 of this publication. The authors also kindly made their peptide/protein identification results available, which were generated using the DeMix search pipeline. 22  The results were prefiltered to 1% FDR on the PSM level. We performed the peptide-to-protein mapping and removed nonmatching (decoy) peptides using the OpenMS tools PeptideIndexer and IDFilter. Afterward the data contained around 28 300 (±2200) peptide IDs per file, corresponding to around 21 100 (±1800) distinct peptide sequences (including modifications) per file. We used this data in our analysis to enable a comparison with DeMix-Q and, by extension, with the other software tools tested by Zhang et al.   FeatureFinderIdentification Analyses   In analyses incorporating external peptide IDs, prior to feature detection with FFId, retention time alignments of those IDs were performed using OpenMS tools. For each LC–MS/MS run, its internal IDs were used as reference to align external IDs from other runs, using MapAlignerIdentification 11  with the “lowess” smoothing option. Subsequently external IDs from multiple runs were merged using IDMerger. In all FFId analyses, two isotopologues per peptide (monoisotopic and  13 C peak) were used in the generation of assays. The expected elution peak width was set to 40 s. The  m / z  window size for chromatogram extraction was 10 ppm. Variability of Peptide Quantification   To compute coefficients of variation (CVs) of peptide abundances, FFId feature detection results were first processed with ProteinQuantifier to obtain peptide quantities. The peptide data was loaded into R and normalized using simple scaling to equal medians to correct for global differences between the LC–MS/MS runs. The following data processing choices were made to allow comparisons to the results reported for DeMix-Q and other software tools: 14  Abundances of differently modified variants of the same peptide sequence were summed. Only peptides that were quantified in all 12 runs were considered. Peptides from spike-in proteins were not excluded from the analysis. (Although their abundances are not expected to be constant, the influence on median CVs is negligible.) Finally, CVs for the resulting peptide abundances were calculated. Protein Quantification   To perform protein quantification, FFId feature detection results were exported using OpenMS’ ProteinQuantifier with the “filter_charge” option enabled, generating separate results for peptides in different charge states. The exported data were loaded into R and filtered to remove peptides mapping to more than one protein or with missing values in more than half of the samples. The results were formatted to fit the requirements for MSstats input data and analyzed using MSstats functions (with default options, unless otherwise noted). 20  Initial processing, including normalization, was performed using the “dataProcess” function, selecting the top 10 features for quantification. Protein abundances for the four biological samples were calculated using the “quantification” function. Protein fold changes for all sample pairs were calculated using the “groupComparison” function. Feature Selection for External IDs   The following procedure was used to assess whether our algorithm successfully selected the correct features for external peptide IDs, when separate sets of internal and external IDs were given as input (see  Strategy 2: Machine Learning  section). For each LC–MS/MS run from the iPRG-2015 data set, the FFId feature detection result based on only the internal peptide IDs was regarded as the gold standard feature set for that run, determining which features were considered as correct for the corresponding charged peptides. The test queried whether the same features were selected if some of the internal IDs were replaced by external IDs (with different RT values) for the same peptides/charges.   In more detail, a suitable test data set was generated as follows: One LC–MS/MS run from the iPRG-2015 data set and its internal peptides was considered at a time. All external ID sets originating from other runs were filtered to retain only IDs matching the internal peptides (using OpenMS’ IDFilter tool with the “whitelist:peptides” option). The set of internal peptides was randomly split into two halves (using a custom Python script), and two corresponding, disjoint sets of internal IDs were generated (again using IDFilter). After these preparations, two FFId analyses were carried out, using each of the two halves of the internal IDs together with the filtered external IDs. (The FFId algorithm requires some overlap in the peptides of internal and external IDs to calculate an RT alignment between the two ID sets, so not all internal IDs could be replaced at the same time.) As a consequence, in each FFId result, features for one-half of the internal peptides were detected based on external IDs. To evaluate how well these features agreed with the gold standard, pairs with matching RT and  m / z  positions in both feature sets were detected. This was done using the OpenMS tool FeatureLinkerUnlabeledQT, 11  with very small tolerances (1 s in RT, 0.0001 Da in  m / z ) and the requirement of matching IDs during the grouping of features. To contrast the number of paired features, the number of possible pairs was determined based on which peptides and charge states yielded features in both the test and gold standard FFId analyses. Results and Discussion   Targeted Feature Detection   We developed an algorithm to detect peptide features in MS1 data in a targeted manner based on peptide identifications derived from MS2 spectra. The algorithm was developed within the OpenMS open-source framework for computational mass spectrometry. A corresponding executable tool, named “FeatureFinderIdentification” (FFId) in adherence to OpenMS naming conventions, is made freely available as part of OpenMS.   In the most basic case, our algorithm is used to detect features for peptide quantification in a single LC–MS/MS run.  Figure  1  (bottom) gives a schematic overview of this. The inputs for the FFId tool then consist of the raw MS1 data (in mzML format) and a set of high-confidence peptide identifications (in OpenMS’ idXML format) derived from the MS2 spectra. OpenMS supports a range of options for generating or importing suitable identification results. The goal of our algorithm is to detect features for all identified peptides in the high-confidence set to enable their quantification. Data processing happens in several phases, which we describe below.   Generation of “in Silico” Peptide Assays   In the context of targeted feature detection, assays encode the targets for which we attempt to detect features. Given the input set of high-confidence peptide identifications, we generate (at least) one assay per peptide and distinct charge state that was identified. To generate the assay or assays for a specific peptide, we consider all available IDs for that peptide. We first determine one or more RT ranges in which we expect the peptide to have eluted from the chromatographic column. (Because elution happens before peptides are ionized in the mass spectrometer, we consider IDs from all charge states together for a more complete picture.) Intuitively, the ID or IDs of a peptide indicates one or several time points at which the peptide was observed; however, we want to capture the whole time range over which the peptide eluted. We thus define a “window of interest” around the RT of every peptide ID based on a parameter for the expected width (in RT) of an elution peak and then merge overlapping windows. Typically, this results in one RT range per peptide that contains all corresponding IDs. However, multiple disjoint ranges can arise for some peptides and must be handled.   Next, we calculate the isotopic distribution, up to a configurable number  N  of isotopologues (default:  N  = 2), of the peptide based on its sequence and modifications, yielding the theoretical relative intensities of the respective isotopic peaks. For each charge state of the peptide, we then calculate the theoretical  m / z  values of those isotopic peaks.   Finally, on the basis of these intermediate results we generate one assay per charge state of the peptide and RT range provided that an ID for the charge was observed in that range. An assay contains  N  “MS1 transitions” for the isotopologues, each defined by the RT range and by the theoretical  m / z  value and relative abundance of the isotopic peak. Chromatogram Extraction and Peak Group Detection   Processing the peptide assays in sequence, OpenSWATH 17  is used to extract chromatograms for the MS1 transitions in the assays. Each extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) is a rectangular (RT by  m / z ) slice of the LC–MS data based on the RT range of the assay and a small window (e.g., 10 ppm) around the  m / z  value of the corresponding transition. The XIC is meant to capture the elution profile of ions of the corresponding isotopologue (among other ions of approximately the same  m / z  value).   The next step is to detect peak groups in the XICs of each assay. Again, OpenSWATH provides the algorithms for this. The process starts by detecting elution peaks in an individual XIC at a time. To this end, the signal in the XIC is smoothed using a Gaussian filter, then local maxima are detected and extended downward on both sides to find the limits of the peaks. Subsequently peaks with corresponding RT ranges are grouped across XICs in order of decreasing peak size. This produces groups of RT-aligned peaks in the XICs corresponding to isotopologues of a peptide. These peak groups are considered as feature candidates in the following steps. The sums of the peak areas in the groups give “raw” feature intensities that could already be used for quantification. ID Mapping and Feature Selection   From the feature candidates (OpenSWATH peak groups) generated in the previous step, we now select one as “the” feature for each peptide and charge state. The best feature candidate is the one that is supported by the highest number of peptide IDs, and thus we map the peptide IDs of appropriate sequence and charge to the candidates based on retention time. The candidate with the highest number of matching IDs is kept, and others are removed; ties are broken according to higher feature intensity. We allow only one feature per peptide/charge even if there are multiple assays, based on multiple RT ranges, to ensure the robustness of the method across different samples. If there is no feature candidate with a matching ID, then we do not report a feature for the peptide/charge. This can happen if OpenSWATH fails to detect a suitable peak group in the data; however, this is a very rare occurrence, as our benchmark below will show. Elution Model Fitting   We add a final processing phase that helps to increase the robustness of our feature intensity estimation. Instead of using “raw” feature intensities calculated by OpenSWATH for quantification, we apply a model-based approach, essentially smoothing out fluctuations in the measured data. Our model for peptide elution over time is a Gaussian function (“bell curve”), which we fit for each feature to the XIC data within the corresponding RT range. Data points from all MS1 transitions/isotopologues are used at the same time, weighted according to their theoretical relative intensities. A least-squares model fit is performed using the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm. If successful, we set the feature intensity to the area under the curve, calculated from the model parameters. If model fitting does not converge or if the estimated model parameters fail consistency checks, then we revert to the “raw” OpenSWATH intensity estimate but adjust it to be on the same scale as the model-based intensities. Combining Multiple LC–MS/MS Runs   In a shotgun experiment with multiple similar LC–MS/MS runs, we aim to detect features to enable quantification of the total set of peptides identified (with high confidence) across all runs. However, we still process the MS1 raw data one run at a time; only the peptide IDs are carried over across runs, giving rise to the notion of internal and external IDs (see  Terminology  section). We have already discussed how FFId detects features for the internal IDs of an LC–MS/MS run. There are two ways to incorporate external IDs in the analysis, which we present in the following.   Strategy 1: Merging Internal and External Peptide IDs   The simplest approach for combining information from multiple LC–MS/MS runs is to make no distinction between internal and external IDs. The sets of IDs can simply be merged (OpenMS offers the IDMerger tool for this purpose) and altogether treated as internal IDs, as described above. However, the drawback is that our assumptions about internal peptide IDs may not hold for external ones. We regard internal IDs as evidence for the detection of the respective peptide at a certain location in the RT-by- m / z  space of the MS1 data. We rely on this information to pinpoint what we consider to be the correct feature for the peptide. Because external IDs come from a different LC–MS/MS run, we face two issues in particular: First, variations in the chromatography between different runs will affect the RT coordinates of external peptide IDs and potentially make them unreliable for feature selection. This can be addressed by computing a retention time alignment between different LC–MS/MS runs and adjusting the RT scales accordingly. The OpenMS tool MapAlignerIdentification 11  is ideally suited for this because it directly uses the RT values of peptide IDs to calculate the alignment and it enables nonlinear correction of chromatographic differences. MapAlignerIdentification and similar solutions will generally work well to correct monotonic deviations between chromatographic runs; however, if the chromatography suffers from low reproducibility, for example, if the order in which peptides elute changes, then RT differences between runs may become impossible to resolve. To increase the peptide coverage while minimizing the potential for unreliable RT values, we can include external IDs only for peptides that are not already represented among the internal IDs. This is supported in OpenMS by the “add_to” option in the IDMerger tool.   The second issue with treating external IDs as internal is overimputation: If different biological samples are analyzed, then a peptide that was observed in one sample may not necessarily be present in another. An external ID for such a peptide could lead to the detection of a false-positive feature if a corresponding peak group is found by OpenSWATH. (However, provided that the RT value of the external peptide ID is reliable, this is due to a general limitation of our targeted feature detection approach: We have no way of distinguishing “true” signals from interference caused by unrelated ions if they overlap in RT and  m / z .)   These caveats notwithstanding, aligning and merging internal and external IDs can be a very effective way of combining data from multiple runs. This is especially true if the samples in question are highly similar and the chromatography is stable, for example, if a low number of runs are analyzed in direct succession on the same column. In such cases the ability to rely on the RT coordinates of peptide IDs to determine the “correct” feature among a set of candidates is difficult to surpass with other approaches. Strategy 2: Machine Learning   FFId offers an alternative, novel mode of operation in which features for external IDs can be detected without depending on the accuracy of the external RT values. The basic idea is to use internal IDs to generate a training data set for a classifier, which can then be applied to predict the correct features for external IDs. This approach is similar to that used by Percolator 7  and mProphet 23  for the statistical validation of PSMs and SRM results, respectively. An overview is shown in  Figure  2 .   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Overview of using machine learning to combine internal and external peptide IDs for feature detection. Each subplot shows a simplified view of an ion chromatogram, containing multiple elution peaks, for the mass-to-charge value that corresponds to the peptide ID of interest. Top left: Given an internal peptide ID, selecting the correct peak (feature) that allows quantification of the ID is simple because the retention time (RT) value of the ID can be relied upon. Top right: For an external peptide ID, the exact RT, relative to the “internal” chromatographic time scale, is uncertain. In addition, because the ID is only inferred, the peptide is not necessarily present in the sample, so there might not be a correct peak. Bottom: Our solution is to consider feature candidates in an RT window around the locations of internal and external peptide IDs. For internal IDs the correct candidates are known. This gives rise to a data set of positive and negative examples (“true” and “decoy” features), with which we train a support vector machine (SVM) classifier. The classifier predicts correctness probabilities for feature candidates, which we use to score and select features for external peptide IDs. In more detail, the process works as follows: Before analyzing any particular LC–MS/MS run with FFId, the external IDs from all related runs should be aligned to the internal IDs (e.g., using MapAlignerIdentification), just like in “Strategy 1” explained above. However, now only the aligned sets of external IDs are merged, and internal and external IDs are passed separately to the FFId program. Internally, FFId realigns the RT scales of both sets of IDs to estimate how well they agree. The algorithm then aggregates all IDs and uses them, without discriminating between internal and external ones, to generate MS1-level assays for peptides. The procedure is the same as described in the  Generation of “in Silico” Peptide Assays  section, with only one difference: The RT region around each peptide ID is increased to account for uncertainty in the RT coordinates of external IDs based on the realignment. Chromatogram extraction and peak group detection then proceed as previously described. Importantly, during the detection step, OpenSWATH calculates a variety of quality scores for the peak groups, measuring, for example, signal-to-noise ratio,  m / z  deviation between transitions and XICs, overlap between peaks in different XICs, and agreement of peak intensities with theoretical isotopologue intensities. FFId adds a special RT deviation score, which measures the distance between a feature candidate and the closest external ID of the matching peptide. (If the assay is based only on internal IDs, then their RTs are transformed to the external scale using the alignment computed in the beginning.) This RT deviation score allows us to capture RT information without fully relying on the RT values of IDs for feature selection. We thus obtain a selection of roughly 15 scores for each feature candidate (OpenSWATH peak group), which will serve as predictor variables for our classifier.   In the feature selection phase, we generate a training data set of positive and negative instances. Positive instances are feature candidates that we consider as “correct” based on matching internal IDs (see  ID Mapping and Feature Selection  section). Negative instances (decoys) are feature candidates without any matches but where internal IDs are available in the assay; in such cases we can be confident that the “correct” feature must be a different one. (Candidates with some but not the highest number of matching IDs for the peptide/charge are considered as ambiguous and are not used for training.) Because the positive and negative instances are selected using internal IDs but the classifier will be applied to feature candidates of external IDs, there is a risk of introducing biases in the training data. This must be avoided to ensure maximum classification performance. The detection of feature candidates works in exactly the same way for peptides with internal IDs, external IDs, or a mixture of both; however, a potential biasing factor is MS1 signal intensity: DDA preferentially triggers MS2 acquisition for precursors of high intensity, so feature candidates in our positive set, supported by internal IDs derived from MS2, will tend to have high intensities. However, we are interested in predictions for peptides  without  internal IDs, which conversely may generate features of lower intensity. To avoid an intensity bias, we select positive and negative instances with the same intensity distribution, in roughly equal numbers, for the training data set. This whole approach allows us to generate an optimal classifier for the data set at hand, in which the weights for different predictors are chosen according to the characteristics of the data. For example, the influence of the RT deviation score can be larger or smaller depending on the reliability of the RT alignment.   Our classification algorithm of choice is the support vector machine (SVM), a robust and versatile machine learning technique. 24  We utilize the SVM implementation in the LIBSVM C library, 18  for which we created a C++ wrapper class for use in FFId. Given the data set of feature candidate scores and positive/negative labels for the training instances, we train an SVM classifier according to the guidelines provided by the LIBSVM authors. 25  To this end, we first scale each predictor to the range 0 to 1. Next, we convert the data into the sparse representation required by LIBSVM. We then set up an SVM model, by default with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel. The parameters of the model (the misclassification cost,  C , and the kernel bandwidth, γ) must be optimized; we do this by performing a grid search over predefined sets of parameter values and running a cross-validation for each parameter combination. After evaluating the cross-validation performances we select the best parameters, then retrain the model on the whole training data set. Subsequently we apply this final model to all feature candidates, predicting the probability of each being the “correct” feature for its peptide and charge.   After the SVM scoring we select which feature candidates to retain (followed by elution model fitting as described above). For peptides/charges with only external IDs, we select the candidate with the highest SVM probability. For peptides/charges with internal IDs, we apply the same ID-based selection as before; that is, we keep the positive instances from the training data set. However, in these cases we also note which feature candidate was scored highest by the SVM, and we record whether this candidate is the correct one according to the “gold-standard” ID-based selection. In the end, the overall fraction of incorrect cases, where we would have chosen the wrong candidate if we had relied on the SVM score, gives an estimate of the FDR for the SVM-based feature selection. However, selection based on the SVM score is only applied to peptide assays derived entirely from external IDs, and thus the FDR estimate has to be scaled according to the fraction of such assays in the data set to arrive at a meaningful FDR value for the whole FFId analysis.   Probabilistic scoring and FDR estimation for “inferred” features enable us to overcome one of the inherent difficulties in combining data from multiple LC–MS/MS runs: By filtering to a specific FDR threshold we can control the risk of false-positive features among our results for cases where peptides referenced by external IDs are not actually present in the sample under consideration. Feature candidates that are not scored highly enough by the SVM classifier can be excluded, thus allowing us to make an informed decision to  not  quantify certain peptides. Evaluation   We applied our FFId algorithm to the iPRG-2015 data set, 21  comparing the three strategies described above: First, we used only the internal IDs from each run as targets for quantification (“internal IDs only”). Second, we used both internal and external IDs together after aligning and merging them (“internal/external IDs, merged”). Third, we used internal and external IDs together in the machine le