>Methods   Generating reaction rules   All our reaction rules are represented in the form of reaction SMARTS [ 14 ]. Reaction rules used for canonical augmentation are provided in Fig.  1  and for isomer transformation in Figs.  3 ,  4 , Additional file  2 : Figure S2 and Additional file  5 : Table S3. Enzymatic reaction rules were computed taking enzymatic reactions from MetaNetX version 2.0 [ 11 ]. To compute rules, we first performed an Atom–Atom Mapping (AAM) using the tool developed by [ 46 ] (Fig.  8 a). Next, multiple substrates reactions were decomposed into components (panel C and D in Fig.  8 ). There are as many components as there are substrates and each component gives the transformation between one substrate and the products. Each product must contain at least one atom from the substrate according to the AAM. This strategy enforces that only one substrate can differ at a time from the substrates of the reference reaction when applying the rule.    Fig. 8.     Open in a new tab   RetroPath2.0 rules and corresponding SMARTS for reaction 2.6.1.93 at various diameters.  a  Full reaction 2.6.1.93 with atom mapping.  b  The list of broken bonds (− 1) and bonds formed (+ 1) is given by their atom numbers.  c  The corresponding SMARTS for the component modelling promiscuity on 6′-Oxo-paromamine: Substrate +  l -Glutamate = Product + 2-Oxoglutarate.  d  The corresponding SMARTS for the component modelling promiscuity on  l -Glutamate: Substrate + 6′-Oxo-paramamine = Neamine + Product.  c ,  d  Rules are encoded as reaction SMARTS and characterized by their diameter (∞ purple, 6 blue or 2 green), that is the number of bonds around the reaction center (atoms 19, 20 and 23, 24) defining the atoms kept in the rule The following step consisted in computing reactions rules as reaction SMARTS for each component. We did it for diameters 2–16 around the reaction center (panels C and D in Fig.  8 ) by removing from the reaction components all atoms that were not in the spheres around the reaction center atoms.   We extracted more than 24,000 reaction components from MetaNetX reactions, each one of those leading to a rule at each diameter (from 2 to 16).   We provide in Supplementary at MyExperiment.org a subset of 14,300 rules for  E. coli  metabolism. The rules were selected based on the MetaNetX binding to external databases and the iJO1366 whole-cell  E. coli  metabolic model [ 43 ]. We also provide enzymatic rules enabling the biosynthesis of aminoglycosides from Glucose. The reactions were extracted from the map00524 KEGG map [ 47 ], and rules were computed as above on reactions for which a MetaNetX identifier could be retrieved. The resulting set comprised 94 rules calculated for each diameter ranging from 2 to 16. RetroPath2.0 core algorithm   The RetroPath2.0 workflow essentially follows an algorithm proposed by some of us [ 16 ,  17 ] and its workflow implementation, which has already been described in details [ 17 ], is summarized in Fig.  9 . We here focus on the different usages of RetroPath2.0 for the use cases provided in “ Results and discussions ” section.    Fig. 9.     Open in a new tab   RetroPath2.0 KNIME workflow. Inner view of the “Core” node where the computation takes place. The “Source, Sink…” and “Rules” nodes parse the source, sink and rules input files provided by the user and standardize data so that it can be processed by downstream nodes. Definitions for source, sink, and rule sets are provided in the text. The outer loop (“Source” loop) iterates over each source compounds, while the inner loop (“Length” loop) allows to iterate the process up to a maximum number of steps predefined by the user. The nodes (1) “FIRE”, (2) “PARSE”, (3) “UPDATE SOURCE…” and (4) “BUILD” are sequentially executed at each inner iteration. Respectively, they (1) apply all the rules on source compounds, (2) parse and standardize new products, (3) update the lists of source and sink compounds for the next iteration and (4) merge results that will be written by the node “Write global results”. Once the maximum number of steps is reached (or no new product is found), the “Compute scope” node identify the scope linking each source to the sink compounds, then these results are written by the node “Write per source results”. Only the main nodes involved in the process are shown In all cases the workflow performs the generation of structures in a breadth-first way by applying iteratively the same procedure. An iteration starts by applying reaction rules to each of the compounds of a source set. For each compound, the products are computed using the RDKit KNIME nodes one-component or two-component reactions [ 19 ]. Products are sanitized (removal of structures having incorrect valence), standardised and duplicates are merged. The set of products will become the new source set for the next iteration. The workflow iterates until a predefined number of iterations is reached or until the source set is empty.   In the case of isomer augmentation (workflow RetroPath2.0-Mods-isomer-augmentation, “ Isomer enumeration ” sections) the initial source set is composed of a single carbon atom and the rule used is  R   1  in Fig.  1 , since it is the only rule that will produce acyclic molecules. The rule is fired on the source set, and the products become the new source set in the next iteration. The workflow is iterated a number of times equal to  N  − 1, where  N  is the number of atoms one wishes the final molecule to have.   In the case of isomer transformation (workflow RetroPath2.0-Mods-isomer-transformation, “ Isomer enumeration ” and “ Virtual screening in the chemical space ” section) the initial source set is composed of a molecule that is filled with the appropriate number of hydrogens using the RDKit KNIME node Add Hs. At each iteration rules are fired on the source set and the products obtained become the new source set for the next iteration. As an additional last step of each iteration, products that have already been processed in a previous iteration are filtered out before building the next source set. This necessitates maintaining a set (named sink) comprising all molecules so far generated. All products that have already been obtained are removed from the product set and the remaining molecules are (1) added to the sink set and (2) used as the new source set for the next iteration. This avoids applying reactions on the same products during subsequent iterations. Disconnected structures are removed from the results by filtering out any product having several disconnected components (according to the SMILES representation). When enumerating alkane, disconnected structures represents between 50 and 66% (depending of the alkane size) of the generated structures before filtering and merging duplicates. To generate the results of Table  1 , since we are enumerating alkanes (no multiple bonds or cycles), the rule to be used is  R   1  in Fig.  3 . To enumerate the isomers of the monomers in “ Virtual screening in the chemical space ” section, if we prohibit the transformation of multiple bonds into cycles and thus keep the number of single, double and triple bonds constant, the rules to be used are  R   1 ,  R   5  and  R   9  in Fig.  3  (also found in Additional file  2 : Figure S2 since the monomers used do not contain triple bonds). Since this algorithm can become computationally intensive, we also provide an additional workflow (called RetroPath2.0-Mods-isomer-transformation-queue) to deal with memory management. This workflow illustrates how to introduce a FIFO data structure for the source set (i.e. queue containing structures upon which rules will be fired) and use it for iteratively firing rules on small chunks of structures (e.g. chunk of 20 structures), new products obtained are then added to the source queue. Interestingly, the breadth-first approach for generating the structures can be replaced by a depth-first approach by replacing the queue (first in, first out structure) by a stack (last in, first out structure).”   In the case of inverse-QSAR (workflow RetroPath2.0-Mods-iQSAR, “ Search for molecules maximizing biological activities ” section), the source set initially comprises the molecules used in the training set when building the QSAR. At each iteration, one or two molecules are chosen at random from the source set depending on the rule set that is being used (one molecule with enzymatic reaction rules, two molecules with isomer transformation rules). Rules are then fired on the selected molecules and an activity is predicted for each product using the QSAR equation. The source set is updated retaining molecules according to a selection tournament procedure borrowed from [ 40 ]. Briefly, the initial source set (i.e. the set of structures used at the start of the current iteration) is merged with the product set (i.e. the set of structures obtained after firing the rules). This merged set is then randomly split into 10 subsets and the 10 top best structures from each subset are retained according to their predicted activity. Finally, all the retained structures are pooled together to form the updated source set to be used at the next iteration. The workflow is iterated a (user) predefined number of times.   In the case of  E. coli  metabolic network completion (workflow RetroPath2.0-Mods-metabolomics, “ Metabolome completion and metabolomics ” section), we provide three workflows. The first workflow is RetroPath2.0, which is fully described in [ 17 ] and is similar to the isomer transformation one. Here, RetroPath2.0 produces a list of molecules obtained using  E. coli  enzymatic reaction rules (see “ Generating reaction rules ” section). The second workflow takes as input the products generated by RetroPath2.0, computes the exact mass for each product and prepare files to be read by OpenMS nodes for MS data peak assignment [ 23 ]. The last workflow is built with OpenMS nodes, it reads several MS data files in mzML format, two lists of adducts in positive and negative modes, and the files generated by the second workflow (containing RetroPath2.0 generated products with masses). The workflow searches for each compound the corresponding peak in the MS spectra. The workflow was parameterized for metabolomics analysis as described in OpenMS manual [ 48 ], the AccurateMassSearch node was set to negative ion mode as the experiment were carried out with an LTQ-Orbitrap instrument operating in negative FT mode (cf. protocols in [ 44 ]).   Further details on how to run all the above workflows are provided in the Supplementary at MyExperiment.org. Additional files     13321_2017_252_MOESM1_ESM.zip  (20.2MB, zip)    Additional file 1.  Monomers maps obtained running Retropath2.0 in section “ Virtual screening in the chemical space ”. The 17 compounds of the 158 available monomers that can be naturally synthesized and the corresponding synthesis pathways.     13321_2017_252_MOESM2_ESM.docx  (599.4KB, docx)    Additional file 2.  Figure S1 represents the execution time of the tested softwares for alkane enumeration. Figure S2 represents the reduced set of transformation rules excluding triple bounds. Figure S3 represents the distributions of predicted  T   g  values for enumerated isomers and for isomers found in PubChem with varying Tanimoto threshold.     13321_2017_252_MOESM3_ESM.xlsx  (6.4KB, xlsx)    Additional file 3: Table S1.  Solution space reduction arguments or rules corresponding to bond configurations in section “ Isomer transformation ”. This is shown for the 36 rules after reduction of the solution space by problem symmetry arguments.     13321_2017_252_MOESM4_ESM.xls  (39.5KB, xls)    Additional file 4: Table S2.  List of 40 compounds from section “ Metabolome completion and metabolomics ” having an identifier in MetaNetX and produced by three identical reactions (i.e. reactions having the same substrates and products) generated using the Sympheny, BNICE and D6 rule sets.     13321_2017_252_MOESM5_ESM.xlsx  (9.9KB, xlsx)    Additional file 5: Table S3.  List of the 19 SMARTS rules that were used in this study.   Authors’ contributions   The work was directed by JLF who sketched the proof of the claim, designed all workflows, and generated the results presented in “ Isomer enumeration ” and “ Metabolome completion and metabolomics ” sections. MK wrote the proofs in “ Isomer enumeration ” section, TD wrote all workflows and produced the results in “ Search for molecules maximizing biological activities ” section. PC used the workflows to generate the results in “ Virtual screening in the chemical space ” section. All authors contributed to the manuscript write-up. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.   Acknowledgements   The authors acknowledge Baudoin Delépine for his contribution to the general workflow architecture and enzymatic reaction rules calculations. Competing interests   The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Consent for publication   Not applicable. Availability of data and materials   The workflows and associated data supporting the conclusions of this article are available on MyExperiment.org,  http://www.myexperiment.org/packs/728.html . Ethics approval and consent to participate   Not applicable. Funding   This work was supported by the French National Research Agency [ANR-15-CE1-0008], the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, Centre for synthetic biology of fine and speciality chemicals [BB/M017702/1]; and Synthetic Biology Applications for Protective Materials [EP/N025504/1]. MK acknowledges funding provided by the DGA and École Polytechnique. Publisher’s Note   Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Footnotes     Electronic supplementary material   The online version of this article (10.1186/s13321-017-0252-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.   Contributor Information   Mathilde Koch, Email: mathilde.koch@inra.fr.   Thomas Duigou, Email: thomas.duigou@inra.fr.   Pablo Carbonell, Email: pablo.carbonell@manchester.ac.uk.   Jean-Loup Faulon, Email: jean-loup.faulon@inra.fr. References       1. Chemicals Abstracts Service, CASREACT  https://www.cas.org/content/reactions . Accessed 28 June 17       2. Warr WA. A short review of chemical reaction database systems, computer-aided synthesis design, reaction prediction and synthetic feasibility. Mol Inform. 2014;33(6–7):469–476. doi: 10.1002/minf.201400052.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3. Szymkuc S, Gajewska EP, Klucznik T, Molga K, Dittwald P, Startek M, Bajczyk M, Grzybowski BA. Computer-assisted synthetic planning: the end of the beginning. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2016;55(20):5904–5937. doi: 10.1002/anie.201506101.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     4. Schneider G. Future de novo drug design. Mol Inform. 2014;33(6–7):397–402. doi: 10.1002/minf.201400034.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     5. Moriya Y, Shigemizu D, Hattori M, Tokimatsu T, Kotera M, Goto S, Kanehisa M. PathPred: an enzyme-catalyzed metabolic pathway prediction server. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010;38(Web Server issue):W138–W143. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq318.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     6. Jeffryes JG, Colastani RL, Elbadawi-Sidhu M, Kind T, Niehaus TD, Broadbelt LJ, Hanson AD, Fiehn O, Tyo KE, Henry CS. MINEs: open access databases of computationally predicted enzyme promiscuity products for untargeted metabolomics. J Cheminform. 2015;7:44. doi: 10.1186/s13321-015-0087-1.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     7. Carbonell P, Parutto P, Herisson J, Pandit SB, Faulon JL. XTMS: pathway design in an eXTended metabolic space. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42:W389–W394. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku362.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     8. Hadadi N, Hafner J, Shajkofci A, Zisaki A, Hatzimanikatis V. ATLAS of biochemistry: a repository of all possible biochemical reactions for synthetic biology and metabolic engineering studies. ACS Synth Biol. 2016;5(10):1155–1166. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.6b00054.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     9. Yim H, Haselbeck R, Niu W, Pujol-Baxley C, Burgard A, Boldt J, Khandurina J, Trawick JD, Osterhout RE, Stephen R, Estadilla J, Teisan S, Schreyer HB, Andrae S, Yang TH, Lee SY, Burk MJ, Van Dien S. Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for direct production of 1,4-butanediol. Nat Chem Biol. 2011;7(7):445–452. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.580.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     10. Liu M, Bienfait B, Sacher O, Gasteiger J, Siezen RJ, Nauta A, Geurts JM. Combining chemoinformatics with bioinformatics: in silico prediction of bacterial flavor-forming pathways by a chemical systems biology approach “reverse pathway engineering”. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(1):e84769. doi: 10