>Materials and Methods   Structure of FLASHQuant   FLASHQuant is composed of two main stages: feature group detection and quantity calculation ( Figure  1 ). Feature group refers to the group of LC features of different charge states from a single putative proteoform and its isotopes. For accurate quantification, the detected feature groups are refined while the quantities are calculated.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Illustration of FLASHQuant algorithm. From a centroided LC-MS1 full scan, FLASHQuant extracts  m / z  traces (individual ion chromatograms), denoted as black curved lines at the top-center. Detected  m / z  traces are then assembled into feature groups, representing putative proteoforms. Feature groups (depicted as yellow and green) often share  m / z  traces (the mixed-colored line), which should be resolved for accurate quantification. The theoretical shapes of each feature group are estimated using its nonshared  m / z  traces by fitting them against an exponential-Gaussian hybrid (EGH) function. Based on the estimated shapes (having retention time and intensity values), the proportion of each shape (q1 and q2) in the shared trace is estimated with a non-negative least-squares solver. Then, the shared  m / z  trace quantity is distributed between the corresponding feature groups. The feature group abundances are finally calculated as the summed area of  m / z  traces in each feature group. The output of FLASHQuant is given as a TSV format file. The feature group detection stage starts with extracting  m / z  traces (individual ion chromatograms) from the LC-MS spectra using MassTraceExtractor. 35  MassTraceExtractor is a self-consistent kernel density estimator that connects peaks having  m / z  values within the tolerance (defined by the instrument’s mass accuracy) along the retention time. Thus, each extracted  m / z  trace represents a chromatographic signal having a specific charge state and isotopic composition over an elution window. This  m / z  trace extraction is performed before deconvolution to reduce noises, similar to the Sliding Window Algorithm 36  in ProSightPD. Then, the windows are set by binning the total retention time of the LC-MS run. The extracted  m / z  traces are deconvolved per window and assembled into feature groups by FLASHDeconv. Both charge and isotope deconvolution are applied to  m / z  traces to determine the masses. In this step, an  m / z  trace may be assigned to multiple feature groups representing the overlapping signal (the shared  m / z  trace) from distinct proteoform ions (the feature groups).   In the next stage, the abundance of feature groups is calculated while resolving conflicting feature groups. FLASHQuant starts by resolving shared  m / z  traces for accurate quantity calculation (similar to EPIQ 37 ) in the conflict resolution method. The shared  m / z  traces are mainly from overlapping signals but also from errors in feature group detection when an  m / z  trace is assigned to an incorrect feature group. While different in origins, both cases can be addressed by comparing the  m / z  trace elution profiles within the feature groups containing the shared  m / z  trace (termed conflicting feature groups). For each shared  m / z  trace, FLASHQuant constructs theoretical shapes (the representative  m / z  trace shapes) of its conflicting feature groups. The theoretical shape of a feature group is generated by selecting its nonoverlapping  m / z  traces and fitting them against the exponential-Gaussian hybrid function. 38  When generating the theoretical shapes for the conflicting feature groups, FLASHQuant attempts to assemble the shared  m / z  trace with the theoretical shapes by solving a non-negative least-squares problem. While solving, the proportion of each theoretical shape in the shared trace is estimated, which can be used to allot the abundance of the shared  m / z  trace to each of the conflicting feature groups. After all shared  m / z  traces are resolved, the abundance of each feature group is calculated by summing areas under all corresponding  m / z  trace curves (see  Supporting Information  for details about each step).   Using centroided MS1 data as input, FLASHQuant outputs information on feature groups, including their monoisotopic masses, retention time range, charge range, and quantities (see  Table S1 or S2 ). Additionally, we provide an extra tool, ConsensusFeatureGroupDetector, allowing users to easily attain feature groups detected across multiple LC-MS runs (i.e., technical replicates) within mass and retention time tolerance. Starting from the most abundant feature group, ConsensusFeatureGroupDetector searches for feature groups within tolerances in all given input files (tab-separated vector (TSV) format), until exhaustion. When specific column names from input files are provided as parameters for mass, apex retention time, and quantity, this tool can be used on result files from quantification software other than FLASHQuant (e.g., TopFD). Data Set Description   We evaluated the performance of FLASHQuant using three data sets with different complexity: PIPMix, SpikeIn, and ProteomeMix. PIPMix is the least complex data set consisting of single LC-MS runs with a six-protein mixture (Pierce Intact Protein Standard Mix). To generate the SpikeIn data set, different amounts of the PIPMix (relatively diluted 1, 1/2, 1/3, 1/5, 1/7, and 1/10 with 20 ng/μL as 1) were spiked into an  E. coli  lysate, each of which was subject to an LC-MS run. The ProteomeMix data set contains varying proportions of proteins from a human Caco-2 cell lysate (1/5, 1/2, 1, 2, and 5) with a constant concentration for  E. coli  lysate.   Prior to MS analysis, proteoforms were separated with a 90 min linear gradient on an Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system equipped with a reversed-phase C4 column coupled online to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. MS1 spectra were acquired at high resolution (120,000), and within a cycle time of 4 s, the most intense ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation. Details are provided in  Supporting Information . Results and Discussion   Runtime Comparison   We benchmarked FLASHQuant against ProSightPD (“ProSightPD Hi Res. Feature Detector” node, version 4.2 in Proteome Discoverer 3.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific), TopFD (TopPIC Suite version 1.7.1), and FLASHDeconv in all comparisons (see  Supporting Information  for the details on parameters). The runtimes of four tools were measured on a desktop PC with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i9–7900X CPU @ 3.30 GHz CPU and 64 GB RAM. FLASHQuant had a significant advantage in terms of runtimes compared to other tools, taking only 26 min for the PIPMix and SpikeIn data sets combined and 14 min for the ProteomeMix data set ( Figure  2 ); 1.5 times faster than FLASHDeconv, > 4 times faster than TopFD, and >17 times faster than ProSightPD. FLASHDeconv showed comparable runtimes for all tests, but FLASHQuant showed slightly faster speeds for all tests.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Runtime comparison among four tools. FLASHQuant showed the shortest run time out of all benchmarking tools. The PIPMix and SpikeIn data sets were executed together, as they share the same parameters. They consist of 21 files, while the ProteomeMix data set contains 10 files. Runtime per file varies between the data sets due to the highly variable parameters (charge and mass) per individual data set in the PIPMix and SpikeIn data sets. FLASHQuant showed significantly shorter (4–34 times) run times than TopFD and ProSightPD per file. Quantification Sensitivity Evaluation with SpikeIn Data Set   As the first validity check on proteoform detection and quantification sensitivity, we compared the performance among the four tools with the SpikeIn data set.  Figure  3 A shows the relative fold changes of four spiked-in proteins, as separately depicted in four columns, from all dilutions and technical replicates in the SpikeIn data set (see  Figure S2  for the total number of results and  Table S1  for the full lists of quantified results from all four tools). Due to the chosen MS setting, only four spiked-in proteins of mass below 28 kDa were detected out of six proteins. Each quantity of proteins was normalized by the respective total ion chromatogram (TIC) value of the LC-MS run. Then, the fold changes were computed based on the average quantity of spiked-in protein at 20 ng/μL concentration, denoted as “1” in  Figure  3 A.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Data analysis of the SpikeIn and ProteomeMix data sets. (A) Relative fold change comparison for the SpikeIn data set. The four spiked-in proteins are shown in four columns, with the expected relative fold change values as red dashed lines. The  x -axis in each column displays three pairs of dots per each tested tool, representing relative fold change values from three replicates. FLASHQuant showed the least biased quantification across all samples, demonstrating its high quantification accuracy and reproducibility. The large deviations from the expected value in IGF-I LR3 protein were due to the distorted raw signals (see  Figure S1  for the details). (B) Relative fold change comparison for the ProteomeMix data set. The consensus feature groups of all samples (five different mixing ratios and two replicates each) that were matched to the human Caco-2 proteoforms (identified by either TopPIC or ProSightPD Search) were employed in this analysis. The violin plots depict the relative logarithmized fold change values per mixture ratio. Their differences from the expected value (the red dashed line in (B)) are shown in (C) as in the density plot. FLASHQuant shows less variance to the expected values with minimum median than other tools. The number of consensus feature groups used for this analysis is 134 for FLASHQuant, 262 for ProSightPD, 129 for TopFD, and 147 for FLASHDeconv. (D) Quantification reproducibility of the jointly detected feature groups matched against identified proteoforms for the ProteomeMix data set. The jointly detected feature groups between technical replicates were taken, and those with masses matched to the identified proteoforms (either by TopPIC or ProSightPD) within 20 ppm tolerance are plotted in the figure. Reproducibility between technical replicates has been evaluated by calculating linear regression between each normalized quantity (depicted as a red line). FLASHQuant and TopFD demonstrated high reproducibility with a higher  R 2  value and regression slope closer to 1 than other tools. All tools succeeded in detecting all four proteins across dilution samples (down to a 1/10 ratio) and triplicates, proving their limit of detection ranges. However, FLASHQuant showed the highest quantification accuracy, as relative fold change differences from the expected value were the smallest by the average value of 0.133, while 0.308 for ProSightPD, 0.143 for TopFD, and 0.14 for FLASHDeconv (see  Supporting Information  for the paired  t  test for the significance values comparison). The fold change values of ProSightPD are more dispersed from the expected values than other tools, especially for the larger (21 and 28 kDa) and lower abundance proteins than others (9 and 11 kDa).   Moreover, when we calculated the coefficient of variation (CV) of replicates with feature group quantity, FLASHQuant and FLASHDeconv reported low median CV values of ∼0.08 from the four proteins, showing high reproducibility, while ProSightPD delivered higher values (∼0.29) ( Figure S3 ). TopFD also reported mostly low CV values, with medians of ∼0.1, but slightly higher (0.13) for the largest protein (28 kDa). Similar to the fold change analysis, FLASHQuant demonstrated its strength in reproducibility for the larger proteins by delivering smaller CV values than others. FLASHQuant Delivers a Strong Connection to the Identification   In order to check the validity of the quantified feature groups, we attempted to explain the masses of the output feature groups from the simplest data set available, PIPMix (see  Figure S4  for the total number of results and  Table S1  for the full lists of feature groups). This is achieved by identifying proteoforms from the tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra in the data set and comparing their masses to the feature groups reported by four tools.   We began by detecting, for each tool, consensus feature groups among all output feature groups from technical triplicates. Consensus feature groups refer to the feature groups detected across all the runs in the entire data set. The default parameter settings of ProSightPD, a mass tolerance of 100 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 8 min (used for all consensus feature group detection from hereon), were applied to this process. For the detection of consensus feature groups in FLASHQuant, TopFD, and FLASHDeconv, we utilized the ConsensusFeatureGroupDetector. The masses of consensus feature groups were then compared to the proteoform masses identified by either TopPIC or ProSightPD Search within 20 ppm mass tolerance (see  Table S3  for the full list of identified proteoforms,  Table S4  for the consensus feature groups matched to the identified proteoforms, and  Table S5  for the detailed number of identified proteoforms). ProSightPD Search is different from the ProSightPD LFQ (ProSightPD Feature Detector) and consists of the “ProSightPD 4.2 Annotated Proteoform Search” node and the “ProSightPD 4.2 Subsequence Search” node. Thus, identification and quantification were separately executed (see  Supporting Information  for details on parameters).   Figure S5  shows the Sankey diagrams of each tool’s consensus feature groups, depicting the portion of feature groups that can be explained with identification results. FLASHQuant and FLASHDeconv found 159 and 366 consensus feature groups. TopFD resulted in the most consensus feature groups while ProSightPD the least (572 vs 107), showing almost 5 times the difference.   The types of consensus feature groups in  Figure S5  can be categorized into three cases: likely true (see  Figure S5 and Table S4 , the identified type plus ID+PTM type), definitely false (the mass artifact type), and unknown. The likely true ones provide a measure of the sensitivity; the higher the number, the more sensitive. FLASHDeconv outperformed the others by reporting the most likely true consensus feature groups. To assess specificity, the number of mass artifacts can be used, and FLASHQuant had the lowest number. It is worth highlighting that FLASHQuant also provides the highest percentage of likely true ones, at 87%. The overlaps of likely true ones among the four tools are depicted as a Venn diagram in  Figure S6 , indicating that many FLASHQuant and ProSightPD results are validated by other tools. The mass distributions between total consensus feature groups and likely true ones were compared in  Figure S7 . While FLASHQuant, ProSightPD, and FLASHDeconv demonstrated similar trends between them, TopFD had predominantly abundant distribution in the <500 Da mass range, accounting for the large number of unknown types in  Figure S5 . As the detection of feature groups on the MS1 level does not necessarily lead to identifications on the MS/MS level (i.e., due to incomplete data acquisition, insufficient fragmentation, or database search limitations), the unknown ones may not necessarily imply false detection of features for quantification. In fact, those from FLASHQuant had plausible isotope patterns (see  Figure S8  for examples), indicating a possibility of multiple PTMs or truncation. Nonetheless, it is unexpected to find a large number of features smaller than 500 Da (equivalent to the mass of 5–9 amino acids) in this well-controlled PIPMix data set, which contains only six intact protein species of large masses. Performance on Proteome-Wide Quantification   FLASHQuant performs rather conservative feature group detection and quantification, leading to fewer consensus feature groups than other tools at the proteome level (See  Figure S9  for the total number of results and  Table S2  for the full list of feature groups). However, the quantification variances from FLASHQuant were relatively small, while its quantification reproducibility was high (See  Figures  3 B,  3 C, and  3 D). Also, when we matched the masses of those consensus feature groups against the identified proteoform masses (by either TopPIC or ProSightPD Search; see  Table S3  for the full list of identified proteoforms), 84.8% consensus feature groups were matched for FLASHQuant, while 70.2% for ProSightPD, 55.6% for TopFD, and 76% for FLASHDeconv. These are the same trends as the above analysis of the PIPMix data set, with more percentages of consensus feature groups from FLASHQuant being validated by identified proteoforms than from other tools.   To test the quantification accuracy, we evaluated relative fold changes of human Caco-2 proteoforms in the ProteomeMix data set ( Figure  3 B). Among the reported feature groups from each LC-MS run, those with a mass within 20 ppm tolerance to identified human Caco-2 proteoform masses were selected for further analysis. Relative fold changes were calculated as in the SpikeIn data set analysis, based on the average quantity at the 1:1 mixing ratio, then logarithmized. The average difference between the measured and expected fold changes is the smallest in FLASHQuant ( Figure  3 C), with median values of 0.45.  Figure  3 B shows that the values of all ratio samples in ProSightPD have larger variances than in other tools, presenting a similar trend as in SpikeIn data set analysis.   Quantification reproducibility between replicates was demonstrated through a linear regression between each quantity of the jointly detected feature groups ( Figures  3 D and  S10 ). Note that jointly detected feature groups represent the feature groups detected across replicates per sample, whereas consensus feature groups used in the previous analysis are from the entire data set. Between the replicates of each sample, we collected the jointly detected feature groups (same mass and retention time tolerance as consensus feature groups) and then evaluated the similarity of their normalized quantities (based on respective TICs). FLASHQuant, TopFD, and FLASHDeconv showed high reproducibility with R 2  values of >0.95 and regression slopes of >0.98, while ProSightPD resulted in less concentrated values to the linear regression line, with R 2  values of 0.7 and regression slopes of 0.86 ( Figure S10 ). When only the jointly detected feature groups matching the identified proteoforms were considered ( Figure  3 D), all tools showed high reproducibility with R 2  values of >0.8 and regression slopes of >0.9. However, slightly closer-to-one R 2  and regression slope values were observed in FLASHQuant and TopFD than the others in all samples. Resolving Overlapping Proteoforms Boosts the Quantification Accuracy   FLASHQuant experienced a boost in both SpikeIn and ProteomeMix data sets using the conflict resolution method. When FLASHQuant was executed without the conflict resolution method (“resolving-off-mode” from hereon vs “default-mode”), still a large portion of reported feature groups (86–88% for SpikeIn and 80–86% for ProteomeMix) overlapped with the default-mode (see  Table S6  for the numbers of overlapped or exclusive feature groups). These overlapped feature groups (within mass and retention time tolerances) from the two modes even showed similar dynamic ranges. The exclusive ones from the resolving-off-mode were mostly eliminated during or after the conflict resolution method in the default-mode, as most of their  m / z  traces were incorrectly assigned to them (