>MATERIALS AND METHODS       Algorithm Overview   OpenPepXL belongs to the category of algorithms that score an entire candidate molecule of two peptides covalently linked with a cross-linker against an experimental spectrum without doing an open-modification search for linear peptides first. In this sense it has more in common with xQuest ( 9 ) and StavroX ( 8 ) than with pLink2 ( 13 ), Kojak ( 14 ), or XiSearch ( 15 ). OpenPepXL keeps a list of all linear peptides with modifications and their masses after  in silico  digestion of the protein database. The candidate peptide pairs are then enumerated for each MS2 spectrum precursor mass ( Fig. 1 ). This way only the necessary pairs are created. By using the indices of the linear peptide table to reference the peptides in a pair, only a minimal amount of additional memory is required for this candidate peptide pair enumeration. Loop-links and mono-links are also considered in this step. Then theoretical spectra containing all linear and cross-linked fragments expected from the peptide pair are generated. By default, b- and y-ion series including neutral losses of NH 3  and H 2 O are considered, but a-, c-, x- and z-ions can also be generated to accommodate different fragmentation methods. A spectrum matching algorithm matches peaks between these theoretical and the experimental spectra. From the number of matched peaks the match-odds score for a candidate peptide pair is calculated (more on the score below).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Overview of peptide pair candidate enumeration and identification in OpenPepXL.  After in silico digestion a database of modified peptides sorted by mass is kept. For each MS2 spectrum the precursor mass (1) is used to determine the mass range for α peptides (heavier). Iterating through this list (2), for each α peptide, the mass range for β peptides is determined (3) and a list of pairs is enumerated. For each candidate pair, theoretical spectra are generated and scored against one experimental MS2 spectrum (label free experiment) or one linear-ion and one cross-linked ion spectrum (labeled cross-linker experiments). For experiments using labeled cross-linkers a few additional pre-processing steps are necessary. To pair MS2 spectra of the same peptide pairs linked by light and heavy isotope labeled cross-linkers the MS1 features across mass traces and retention time have to be detected and paired. We use the OpenMS tool for MS1 labeling (FeatureFinderMultiplex) to detect pairs of MS1 features from light and heavy cross-links based on the characteristic mass shift. OpenPepXL then maps MS2 spectrum precursors to their respective features. MS2 spectra mapped to feature pairs are then paired up and processed ( Fig. 2 ) to get peak sets from linear and cross-linked fragments with reduced noise. When matching theoretical spectra against these peak sets, only linear theoretical fragment peaks are matched against the experimental linear peaks and vice versa. This preprocessing step is derived from the xQuest algorithm and focuses the matching and scoring to smaller sets of peaks to reduce the chance of false-positive peak matches. The scores of the linear and cross-linked ion matches are combined to one score before the ranking and filtering of candidates.   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Preprocessing of experimental spectrum pairs for experiments with labeled linkers.  DSS D 0 /D 12  is used as an example. Two experimental spectra from the same peptide pair but a different linker mass are matched without a mass shift and with a mass shift of the label mass difference considering multiple charges. The result is a linear ion spectrum with unknown charges and a cross-linked ion spectrum with known ion charges. This allows for a more constrained and targeted matching to theoretical peaks. Match-Odds Score   The match-odds score used in OpenPepXL is based on the score of the same name from the xQuest algorithm ( 9 ). It is based on the probability of a random match between any peak from the experimental fragment ion spectrum and any peak in the theoretical fragment ion spectrum, given the mass tolerance window  tol , mass range  r , the number of peaks in the theoretical fragment spectrum  s  and the number of considered charges for all theoretical peaks  c . The probability of one random match to a fragment ion peak is calculated as:      p   =   1   −   ( 1   −   2 × t o l 1 2 r ) s / c   (1)     The cumulative distribution function of a binomial distribution with sample size  s  and probability  p  is used to determine the probability of getting more than  k  matched peaks between the experimental and theoretical fragment ion spectra by random chance:      P ( X   >   k ) = ∑ i = k + 1 s ( i s ) p i ( 1   −   p ) s − i   (2)     This probability will decrease toward 0 for higher numbers of  k  where a smaller probability denotes a better match, because it is less likely to have happened by chance. With the -log() function the probability is turned into a score with higher numbers denoting a better match:      m = − log ( P ( X   >   k ) )   (3)     We call this the match-odds score  m  and it is combined with the precursor error  pe  (difference between theoretical and experimental precursor mass in ppm) in the following formula to get the final OpenPepXL score:      s c o r e = 0.2 * log ( 10 − 7  +  m )  −  0.03 * | p e |   (4)     This formula was determined by an agreement between a linear regression and a linear discriminant analysis done to find the best linear combination to separate target from decoy hits on several XL-MS data sets (refer to supplemental Methods for more details). Mass Spectrometry of CRM Complex   The trimeric complex of human CRM1, SNP1 and Ran carrying a Q69L mutation was cross-linked with bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) and injected into an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in duplicates under three normalized collision energy (NCE) conditions using a 50-min method. MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. Fifteen most abundant precursors with charge of 3-7 were selected for MS2 fragmentation at NCE 20, 24 or 28% (refer to the supplemental Methods for more details on experimental procedure). For the protein database only the three UniProt sequences  O14980 ,  O95149  and  P62826  were used. They were manually modified to reflect the modifications made during the protein expression and purification ( 22 ). The MS proteomics data including the modified protein sequences have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium ( 21 ) via the PRIDE ( 20 ) partner repository with the data set identifier PXD014359. Public Data Sets   In addition to the CRM complex data set described above, three data sets were downloaded from public repositories or kindly provided to us by other laboratories.   We chose a more complex publicly available data set derived from a BS3-cross-linked crude ribosomal fraction obtained by size exclusion chromatography of HEK293 cell lysate (ProteomeXchange ID PXD006131) ( 23 ). The resulting sample was a complex mixture of more than 1700 proteins, which were quantified by label-free quantification of linear peptides. With this data set several protein databases were provided. Starting from one containing the 32 most abundant proteins and doubling in size up to the 512 most abundant proteins. We searched the HCD fragmented subset of this data set consisting of about 170.000 HCD fragmented MS2 spectra against a database of the 128 most abundant proteins and 128 reversed sequence decoys.   Additionally, we analyzed a data set with labeled DSS-d 0 /d 12  and PDH-d 0 /d 10  (pimelic acid dihydrazide) cross-linkers. Commercial Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA; Sigma-Aldrich) was cross-linked with labeled DSS or PDH cross-linker in separate experiments. Both samples were independently analyzed using HCD fragmentation and high-resolution MS/MS detection (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) or ion trap CID fragmentation with low-resolution MS/MS detection (Orbitrap Elite). This data set was published previously as part of a larger study ( 24 ) and kindly provided to us by Alexander Leitner upon request.   Furthermore, we used a cross-linked synthetic peptides data set published by Beveridge  et al.  (ProteomeXchange ID PXD014337) ( 25 ). Instead of using proteins digested by trypsin, tryptic peptides from the  S. pyogenes  Cas9 protein with one internal lysine each were synthesized in that study. The peptide termini were modified to make sure that DSS could not cross-link to the N termini or C-terminal lysines. The peptides were kept in 12 separate groups without overlapping peptide sequences. Each group was cross-linked with DSS and the cross-linked peptide solutions were mixed before the MS data acquisition of three technical replicates. This means that identified cross-links with the two cross-linked peptides coming from the same group are almost certainly valid identifications, whereas cross-links between peptides from different groups are certain to be false identifications. The protein database we used was the  S. pyogenes  Cas9 sequence with 10 additional proteins from the supplemental material of the original publication of this data set. Data Processing   The .RAW files of all data sets were converted into mzML, mzXML, and MGF files using MSConvertGUI from the ProteoWizard toolkit version 3.0.10577. The binary encoding precision was set to 64-bit. Writing an index and TPP compatibility were turned on. No compression was used for mzML files. Reversed sequence decoy protein databases were generated from the target protein databases using the TOPP tool DecoyDatabase. Because it creates its own decoys, only the target database was provided to pLink2. OpenPepXLLF 1.1 (OpenPepXL Label-Free) with the TOPP tool XFDR for False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimation, XiSearch 1.6.731 with xiFDR 1.1.27 for FDR estimation, TPP 5.1.0 with Kojak 1.6.0 and PeptideProphet for FDR estimation, xQuest 2.1.3 with xProphet for FDR estimation as well as pLink 2.3.5 and StavroX 3.6.6.5 with their built-in FDR estimation algorithms were used to identify cross-links in the label-free data sets. The parameters of the different tools were set to equal values where possible and to reasonable or similar values otherwise ( supplemental Table S1 ,  Table S2 ,  Table S3 ). Additional filtering and post-processing were partly done with the TOPP tools IDFilter, IDMerger and TextExporter for OpenPepXL and xQuest output and otherwise with R scripts. An FDR cutoff of 5% on the cross-link spectrum match (CSM) level was applied to every tool and all data sets unless indicated otherwise. Additionally, after this cutoff only unique residue pairs (URPs) supported by at least two of the remaining CSMs were kept. Also, a filter for link distance was applied to intra-peptide links or loop-links. Linked residue pairs were only kept, if they were at least 4 residues apart in the database sequence. This was done to further harmonize the tool results, because this cutoff was different among the tools and linked residue pairs with short sequence distances are not very informative. All tools were compared on the same Windows 10 PC with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-6500 CPU and 8 GB of RAM using one CPU core.   The data sets with labeled cross-linkers were only processed with OpenPepXL and xQuest. The TOPP tool FeatureFinderMultiplex was used to detect pairs of MS1 features for OpenPepXL. Otherwise, the same processing steps and filtering rules as for the first two label-free data sets were applied.   The synthetic peptides data set was processed with OpenPepXL with search settings and filter criteria matching those used in the original publication of this data set in Beveridge  et al.  ( 25 ). Search results for the other tools were taken from the publication. This includes the 5 and 1% CSM-FDR results from the search against the  S. pyogenes  Cas9 sequence with 10 additional proteins. For this data set only the CSM-FDR cutoff was applied and the other filtering steps skipped to make the results directly comparable to those from the original publication.   The MS proteomics data from the CRM data set, including search results from all tools compared in this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium ( 21 ) via the PRIDE ( 20 ) partner repository with the data set identifier PXD014359. The reanalyzed ribosomal fraction data set was deposited with identifier PXD014520 and the BSA data set with identifier PXD014523. The OpenPepXL results for the synthetic peptide data set were deposited with identifier PXD021417. Sensitivity and Specificity   In this study we use the number of reported cross-links under a fixed FDR threshold from the target protein database as a substitute for the real sensitivity of a search. Because of the tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity, we compare the sensitivity of all tools at the same FDR setting of 5% at the CSM level. Additionally, only URPs matched to at least two spectra are kept. For OpenPepXL we also recalculate the FDR at unique link level by keeping the decoy hits through the filtering steps and recalculating the FDR for the filtered list of URPs. Where it is possible, we validate the URPs against previously published structural data. For the synthetic peptide data set, it is possible to validate the identified cross-links more objectively than using protein structures. Structural Validation   TopoLink ( 26 ) was used for an analysis of solvent accessible surface distances (SASD) between cross-linked residues. A cutoff of 35 Å was chosen. SASD was measured between Cβ atoms while ignoring all side chains beyond their Cβ atoms.   UCSF Chimera ( 27 ) with the Xlink Analyzer ( 28 ) plugin was used for a visualization of the identified cross-links on the PDB structures. A Euclidean distance cutoff of 35 Å was chosen for the link coloring. Cross-links consistent with the structures were colored blue, inconsistent cross-links red.   The CRM data set was validated on the x-ray crystallography structure with PDB ID 3GJX ( 22 ) and the BSA data set was validated on chain A from the x-ray crystallography structure with PDB ID 4F5S. The ribosomal fraction data set was validated on a larger set of x-ray crystallography and cryo-EM structures. RESULTS       Benchmark Results   In order to assess the performance of OpenPepXL, we compared it to five currently popular XL-MS search engines (StavroX ( 8 ), xQuest ( 9 ,  10 ,  12 ), pLink2[13], Kojak ( 14 ) and XiSearch ( 15 )) on a number of data sets. To the extent possible, the tools were used with settings as similar as possible (see  supplemental Tables S1 ,  S2  and  S3  for all settings). The data sets used differ in size and complexity: Applying OpenPepXL to the more complex ribosomal fraction sample with thousands of proteins gives insights into sensitivity and performance, but we could only structurally verify about one third of the cross-links. Hence, a second comparison assesses both sensitivity and specificity on the highly purified sample of the CRM complex with a known three-dimensional structure. Lastly OpenPepXL is applied to data generated with labeled cross-linkers and a different cross-linker chemistry to demonstrate its versatility.   To assess the sensitivity of OpenPepXL compared with other tools, we ran a search on the ribosomal fraction data set. About 170,000 MS2 spectra were searched against a protein database of 128 target and 128 decoy proteins on a desktop PC with 8 GB of memory. The 128 target protein database was the largest database that OpenPepXL and XiSearch could handle in a reasonable runtime of less than 3 days. OpenPepXL identified 110 unique residue pairs (URPs), followed by pLink2 ( 13 ) with 102 ( Fig. 3 A ). The calculated URP level FDR (URP-FDR) for OpenPepXL after applying the filters was estimated to be 8.8%. A Venn-Diagram showing the overlap of identifications between the tools is shown in  supplemental Fig. S5 . StavroX ( 8 ) could not finish the search because of computer memory requirements. xQuest ( 9 ) did not exceed the available memory, but the search was canceled after a week, because the projected remaining runtime under these conditions was unreasonable. Here it has to be noted, that xQuest can be parallelized and can run on a cluster, so in general finishing this search with the limited amount of computer memory is probably within its capabilities. It can also analyze most data sets with labeled cross-linkers within feasible runtimes. The sensitivity of OpenPepXL comes at the cost of a full search of the squared search space and the increased runtime associated with that. To analyze the ribosomal fraction data set using one CPU core pLink2 took 15 min, Kojak about 3 h, OpenPepXL 28 h and XiSearch 36 h ( Fig. 3 B ). OpenPepXL can also be installed on Linux computing clusters and a speedup by a factor of 15 can be achieved by running the tool on 25 cores ( supplemental Fig. S1 ). A structural validation of the ribosomal fraction data set proved to be difficult because most of the identified cross-links linked residue pairs that were not resolved in existing PDB structures. Results from the links that could be validated are shown in  supplemental Figs. S3  and  S4 . Curiously, none of the links found by any of the tools were inconsistent with the structures.   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Results from the analysis of the ribosomal fraction data set.   A , Numbers of identified unique residue pairs (URPs) in the ribosomal fraction data set with a target database of 128 proteins. OpenPepXL identified 110 URPs, pLink2 identified 102 URPs, Kojak 67 URPs and XiSearch 54 URPs. Structural verification of these cross-links is presented in  supplemental Figs. S3  and  S4 . StavroX exceeded the available memory of 8 GB and could not finish the search. xQuest did not exceed the available memory, but the search was canceled because the projected runtime under these conditions was unreasonable.  B , Runtimes in hours needed to analyze the ribosomal fraction data set with a database of 128 target and 128 decoy proteins using one CPU core. pLink2 only took 15 min. Kojak took 3 h, OpenPepXL 28 h and XiSearch 36 h. To show that the cross-links reported by OpenPepXL are useful for modeling protein structures and that the high sensitivity does not result from just reporting more false-positives, a highly purified sample of the trimeric CRM complex with known three-dimensional structure was measured and analyzed by all compared tools. OpenPepXL and pLink2 each reported 78 URPs in total, Kojak reported 61. The cross-links that could be mapped on the structure were 45 URPs for OpenPepXL, 41 URPs for Kojak, followed by pLink2 with 40 URPs ( Fig. 4 A ). The calculated URP- FDR for OpenPepXL after applying the filters was estimated to be 12%. These URPs were validated by calculating the solvent accessible surface distance (SASD) between the linked residues and applying a cutoff of 35 Å. The SASD was calculated on the structure with PDB ID 3GJX. OpenPepXL reported one URP that is inconsistent with the structure, Kojak only reported consistent URPs and pLink2 reported 2 URPs that are inconsistent with the structure ( Fig. 4 A ,  Fig. 5 ). The error rate of OpenPepXL on this data set is approximately equal to that of other tools with comparable sensitivity. OpenPepXL identified 14 URPs, that were not identified by any of the other tools and 6 of them were structurally validated ( supplemental Fig. S6 ). The annotated spectra of the highest-scoring CSMs for each of those 14 URPs are shown in  supplemental Figs. S9 – S22 .   Fig. 4.   <