>Material and methods   Sampling and sample preparation   Exemplary samples from a non-target screening approach have been prepared and measured with HPLC-HRMS for centroiding algorithm development and validation. The samples measured were grab samples taken from a wastewater treatment plant effluent in Warburg (Stadtwerke Warburg GmbH, Warburg, Germany). The effluent samples usually contain a high load of organic substances, which increases matrix-associated effects in HRMS such as signal overlay. Therefore, they serve as suitable datasets to test the algorithm’s robustness. Detailed instructions on sampling and sample preparation were published by Hohrenk et al. (2020) [ 24 ]. Instrumental analysis   The HPLC system Dionex UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for chromatographic separation [ 26 ]. Details of the chromatography can be obtained from the SI and elsewhere [ 24 ]. The HPLC was coupled with a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for accurate mass detection. The Orbitrap measurements were performed as full scan mode in MS1 ( m / z  100–1000) with a mass resolution of 70,000 at  m / z 200  and data-dependent MS2 scans with the five most intense peaks per mass spectrum at a mass resolution of 17,500 at  m/z  200. The algorithm was developed for MS1 and MS2 spectra and can be applied for ESI-positive and ESI-negative measurements. All examples shown within this work refer to MS1 spectra in ESI-positive mode. However, for algorithm development, the chromatographic domain of the datasets was neglected, as the qualities of consecutive mass spectra are assumed to be independent. Therefore, the developed centroiding algorithm can be used universally for either measurement with or without prior chromatographic separation. Data handling   The instrumental measurement raw files (in case of Orbitrap-MS, Thermo *.raw format) were converted to profile mass spectra *.mzXML with  Proteowizard’s msConvert  to import them more easily into the applied programming environments [ 19 ]. However,  msConvert  was not used for centroiding in this step, but only for conversion to open format. The new centroiding algorithm is platform-independent and implemented and available in the programming languages Python (v3.9), R (v4.0.4), and Julia (v1.6.3). Within the programming environment, third-party packages have been applied, listed in the supplementary material (Table  S3 ). The third-party packages are installed automatically in our ready-to-use application, which lowers the initial hurdle to work with our algorithm. Finally, the centroided data are exported to *.csv at the end of the processing workflow. Regression workflow for peak profile centroiding   Centroiding reduces multiple data points that form a peak profile to a single  m / z -intensity pair that estimates its theoretical mode. The core idea of our new method is a regression of the measured profile data with an adequate model. In this subsection, we present the concept of Data Quality Score for  Gaussian -shaped peak profiles commonly observed in Orbitrap-MS as the results presented and discussed focus on this instrument [ 14 ]. TOF–MS can generate peak profiles that are non-symmetric and thus cannot be appropriately described by a  Gaussian  model [ 15 ]. Principally, different asymmetric models are available for this purpose; however, many can only be accessed by non-linear regression [ 27 ]. In this work, we present the following approach as a proof of concept: by switching from the  Gaussian  to  Bi-Gaussian  model, profile mass spectra generated by TOF–MS can be analyzed. The central concept of the peak regression presented in this study is not changed due to a different peak model. Therefore, details on the TOF–MS centroiding routine can be found in a specific section in the supplementary material. The development of the algorithm for TOF–MS was performed using a dataset by Samanipour et al. (2021) [ 23 ]. The  Gaussian  peak function we use for this purpose will be derived within this paper as well. The model parameters include all relevant peak information, such as position, height, and width, and associated uncertainties. These uncertainties are essential for the subsequent scoring of the centroids. For regression, we used  Caruana ’s approach, which allows linearizing the non-linear  Gaussian  curve fitting to minimize calculation efforts [ 26 ]. However, the utilized regression can only be applied to a single peak profile at a time. Therefore, the mass spectra must first be divided into smaller packages containing isolated peak profiles. In Orbitrap-MS, the resolved peak profile intensities are surrounded by zeros. This circumstance is helpful as these zeros can be considered predefined peak boundaries.   However, overlapping peak profiles also exist, which will not work without splitting in advance [ 26 ]. In this context, valley points indicate splitting locations, assigning the valley point itself to both profiles. Potentially, deconvolution can be used to determine the centroids of non-resolved overlapping peaks. We deliberately decided against deconvolution. This would lead to non-linear regression problems that are very time demanding, usually not purposeful due to the big data files generated, for example, by HPLC-HRMS. When no deconvolution is applied, we neglect that neighboring peaks influence each other in their shapes through an overlap in their peak area. However, the accuracy benefit of deconvolution is limited for peaks with optimal nearly  Gaussian  shapes. A schematic overview of how the centroids are generated from the profiles is shown in Fig.  1 .   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Procedure of our new algorithm for centroiding profile mass spectra: The standard errors associated with the parabola in step 2 are used for the calculation of the Data Quality Scores After isolating all the peak profiles, the regression itself can be performed using the already mentioned  Gaussian  model as the basis function. Thus, the function that describes the intensity curve is given by:     I ^ ( x ) = I ^ 0 · exp - ( x - x ^ 0 ) 2 2 σ ^ 2   1     where  I ^ x  is the estimated intensity at the independent variable  x ,  I ^ 0  is the estimated peak height, and  x ^ 0  is the estimated peak position which equals the centroid in our case. The estimated standard deviation  σ ^  of the  Gaussian  peak is a measure for peak width.   Following  Caruana , the given model (Eq.  1 ) is not directly accessible with linear regression which would lead to a time-consuming iterative solving process and is therefore not suitable for the millions of peak profiles HRMS data can contain. To that end, we perform log-transformation of Eq.  1  to estimate peak parameters and their uncertainties with a second-order linear regression without the need for iterative optimization. As shown by Caruana et al. (1986), the linearized model is described by [ 26 ]:     ln I ^ ( x ) ⏟ y ^ = ln I ^ 0 - x ^ 0 2 2 σ ^ 2 ⏟ β ^ 0 + x ^ 0 σ ^ 2 x ⏟ β ^ 1 x - 1 2 σ ^ 2 x 2 ⏟ β ^ 2 x 2   2     which is a second-order polynomial, and the parameters of the  Gaussian  peak are estimated via [ 26 ]:     x ^ 0 = - β ^ 1 2 β 2 ^   3       σ ^ = - 1 2 β ^ 2   4       I ^ 0 = exp β ^ 0 - β ^ 1 2 4 β ^ 2   5     The estimated  Gaussian  peak area  A ^  can be obtained by:     A ^ = I ^ 0 · σ ^ · 2 π   6     The linear regression problem (Eq.  2 ) is parallelized and solved using matrix algebra. Due to the log-transform, noise strongly influences the fit results, especially with an increased distance to the centroid position. However, weighted linear regression will treat this problem [ 28 ]. The weights can be calculated as follows:     w i = I i ∑ I i 2   7     with  w i  being the weight of data point  i  and  I i  is the  i  th intensity. The weight with a power of 2 fits very well in the case of Orbitrap-MS data but could potentially be changed by the user. The regression parameters  β ^  are estimated by:     β ^ = ( X T W X ) - 1 X T W Y = β ^ 0 β ^ 1 β ^ 2   8     where  X  is the Vandermonde matrix,  Y  is the intensity matrix, and  W  is the diagonal matrix containing the weights. Sparse matrices are applied here for fast calculation with low memory demands. For one spectrum, the sparse matrix has the dimension  n × m  with  n  the number of data points in that spectrum and  m  being the number of peak profiles. For the second-order linear regression, the sparse Vandermonde matrix  X  for two exemplary peak profiles consisting of  i  and  j  data points is given by:     X = 1 x 11 x 11 2 ∗ ∗ ∗ 1 x 12 x 12 2 ∗ ∗ ∗ ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ∗ ∗ ∗ 1 x 1 i x 1 i 2 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ 1 x 21 x 21 2 ∗ ∗ ∗ 1 x 22 x 22 2 ∗ ∗ ∗ ⋮ ⋮ ⋮ ∗ ∗ ∗ 1 x 2 j x 2 j 2   9     where asterisks are zeros and do not occupy memory in sparse matrix notation. Derivation of the data quality score   In the following, the DQS for HRMS will be derived. A high DQS shall describe a peak profile of high quality, and therefore high accordance with a  Gaussian  peak. The  Gaussian  peak shape depends on three parameters height, width, and position, which are derived from the three regression coefficients (see Eq.  8 ). Accordingly, if one of these regression coefficients could only be estimated with low confidence (expressed through a high standard error), the data quality is reduced with respect to the  Gaussian  model. Therefore, we need a measure that incorporates all three regression coefficients, and their associated standard errors, and that is independent of the scale of the  Gaussian  peak to estimate the overall peak quality. Alternatively, Bayesian statistics could estimate the regressions’ uncertainties. However, this is significantly more computationally expensive due to the Monte Carlo method involved and thus not feasible for us, since a sample of  n  = 1000 did not provide any significant variation in the results (SI). To that end, we propose using the relative error of the  Gaussian  peak area for DQS calculations:     DQS = 1 - erf Δ A ^ A ^   10     where  erf x  is the  Gaussian  error function and  Δ A ^  can be deduced from error propagation:     Δ A ^ = ∂ A ^ ∂ I ^ 0 2 Δ I ^ 0 2 + ∂ A ^ ∂ σ ^ 2 Δ σ ^ 2   11     Δ A ^  and  Δ σ ^  are calculated from the regression standard errors by applying the rules of error propagation for Eqs.  4  and  5 . A plot of the function (Eq.  10 ) used to obtain the DQS is given in the supplementary material in Figure  S2 . In Eq.  10 , the  Gaussian  error function was applied to calculate the DQS because the resulting equation always outputs values between 0 and 1. A relative error of 0 leads to a DQS of 1, while an infinite relative error leads to a DQS of 0.   The regression standard errors are estimated through the variance–covariance matrix of the regression coefficients:     s ^ 2 ( β ) = MSE · ( X T W X ) - 1   12     With the mean square error MSE of regression calculated by:     MSE = 1 n - 3 ∑ w i ( y i - y ^ i ) 2   13     With  n - 3  equal to the degrees of freedom,  y i  is the logarithmized raw intensity, and  y i ^  is the fitted logarithmized intensity.   In some cases, the peak fit does not follow the expected  Gaussian  shape. Peaks that do not fulfill the following criteria are removed:     Coefficients  β ^ 2 < 0  as otherwise  Gaussian ’s standard deviation  σ ^  is not defined   At least 4 data points to obtain a fit with a residual degree of freedom     Criterion 1 requires that all second-order linear regressions show downward-opening parabolas in the logarithmic domain. Otherwise, the determination of  σ ^  in Eq.  4