>Materials and Methods   The experiments in this manuscript were designed to compare the performance of our proposed combination of experimental design and computational analysis to pre-existing data-dependent and independent analytical workflows. To this end, we acquired two datasets: a spike-in experiment to measure the sensitivity, accuracy, and variability of our technique and a comparative proteomics experiment on rapamycin-treated yeast to demonstrate the practicality of the new technique. We use the term “acquisition method” throughout to refer to the scan program executed by the mass spectrometer, sometimes also referred to as the “scan sequence.” We use DDA and three DIA acquisition methods: (1) 10  m / z  non-overlapping windows, (2) 20  m / z  non-overlapping windows, and (3) 20  m / z  overlapping windows. The term “analytical workflow” is the combination of an acquisition method and post-processing (ex. 20  m / z  overlapping windows with demultiplexing). The term “condition” represents a spike-in concentration in the bovine dilution experiment and a rapamycin treatment in the rapamycin study. Details on demultiplexing of data, sample preparation, data acquisition, and data analysis follow.   Demultiplexing of Data Acquired Using Overlapping Windows   Demultiplexing Algorithm   The overlap-based acquisition scheme in Figure  1 C uses the pattern of the scans to infer the side of an isolation window that generated a signal. For example, a fragment that originated from a precursor  m / z  of 875 will appear in scans that cover 860–880  m / z  and in scans that cover 870–890  m / z  but  not  in scans that cover 850–870  m / z . By contrast, a fragment that originated from a precursor  m / z  of 865  m / z  will appear in the 860–880- m / z  scans and in the 850–870- m / z  scans but  not  in the 870–890  m / z  scan. When fragment chromatograms are extracted, signals that originated from the correct side of the 20  m / z  window will appear as smooth chromatographic peaks, while signals that originated from the incorrect side will appear only in every-other scan and will have a characteristic “spiky” pattern (Figure  1 C, right panel) due to their alternating presence/absence in the scans. The proposed demultiplexing algorithm conceptually exploits this property of the overlapped window scheme to remove interference and attempts to assign each signal from a 20  m / z  window to its correct 10  m / z  sub-window.   The algorithm is based on linear non-negative least squares and is mathematically similar to, but conceptually and practically distinct from, the algorithm for demultiplexing multifill DIA data presented previously [ 11 ]. Specifically, we define the notion of “demultiplexing regions,” which are the smallest windows to which signals can mathematically be assigned based on the pattern of overlapping windows. For example, in the acquisition strategies used in this manuscript (see “Data-Independent Acquisition”), the demultiplexing regions have a width of 10  m / z . Each 20  m / z  isolation window combines signals from two demultiplexing regions, the left and the right halves of the window (see Figure  1 C). There are a total of 41 demultiplexing regions, in steps of 10  m / z  from 490 to 900  m / z . Our goal is to assign signals of interest in a given isolation window to the correct demultiplexing region.   To do this, for each scan  s  and for each transition of interest, we use the scans  s  − 20 to  s  + 19 to form a linear system of equations relating the measured intensity of each scan to the combination of multiplexed regions that it includes. We then solve the matrix equation:   XA = Y   where  X  is an  n  ×  n  “design matrix” whose rows represent scans (plus one regularization row) and whose columns represent demultiplexing regions (for our data  n  = 41) and contains a 1 wherever a scan includes a given demultiplexing region and a 0 where it does not.  Y  is the “observed data,” an  n  ×  m  matrix whose rows represent scans (plus one regularization row) and whose columns represent fragment ions ( m  is the number of fragment ions of interest and depends on the specific peptides being analyzed) and whose entries represent the observed intensity of each transition for each scan.  A  is an  n  ×  m  matrix whose rows represent demultiplexing regions and whose columns represent transitions and whose entries represent the unknown demultiplexing region intensities that we are solving for.   Because mass spectrometry signal intensities are required to be positive, we solve the equation  XA = Y  using non-negative least squares, specifically using the Lawson-Hanson algorithm [ 22 ]. This technique is similar to the method described previously, but unlike the randomly chosen, non-adjacent windows described previously [ 11 ], for our overlapping windows, each MS/MS scan consists of adjacent demultiplexing regions, so the matrix  A  is close to diagonal. This allows us to use special-purpose heuristics to approximate the solution of the constrained least squares problem quickly. An approximate solution can be obtained by working with small blocks of the matrix equation  XA = Y  rather than having to work with the full matrices (see  Supplementary Note ). With these heuristics, we can demultiplex ~ 1000 transitions from ~ 56,000 MS/MS spectra in 10 min. The mathematical details of solving the matrix equation are described in the  Supplementary Note .   The non-negative least squares algorithm, including our heuristic approximations, is general and thus can be applied to any acquisition scheme that involves partially overlapping windows. The algorithm is not limited to the 20  m / z  width/10  m / z  overlap chosen in this manuscript. The algorithm is implemented in Skyline [ 23 ] (see  Supplementary Methods ) and ProteoWizard msconvert [ 24 ] where it can be used to produce full demultiplexed spectra. Bovine Spike-In Experiment: Data Acquisition   Sample Preparation   We generated a series of samples in which an equimolar six bovine protein digest (Bruker-Michrom) was spiked into a background matrix of digested  S. cerevisiae  soluble lysate. The yeast tryptic digest background was prepared from 400 μL of 5.1 μg/μL of yeast proteins (strain BY4741) that are soluble in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). This digest was combined with 60 μL 1 M ABC, 110 μL 0.5% PPS detergent (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), and 6 μL 500 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) for 30 min at 60 °C. The reaction was cooled to room temperature and 8 μL 500 mM iodoacetamide was allowed to react for 30 min prior to the addition of 40 μL of 2 μg/μL TPCK-treated trypsin (Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, NJ). Digestion proceeded for 4 h at 37 °C. Residual iodoacetamide was quenched with 5 μL 500 mM dithiothreitol for 15 min at 37 °C. The final digest was acidified with 60 μL 10% trifluoroacetic acid. The six bovine protein tryptic peptide mixture (Bruker, Auburn, CA) was mixed in various concentrations (48, 16, 4, 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.05, and 0.025 fmol/μL) with a constant yeast tryptic peptide background (0.75 μg/μL). Two microliters of each sample was injected for each mass spectrometry run. Liquid Chromatography   Splitless, nano-flow liquid chromatography separation was performed using a Waters nanoACQUITY (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) UPLC system configured for partial loop injection coupled online to the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Fused silica capillary tubing (75 μm I.D.; Polymicro Technologies) was pulled to a tip of ~ 5 μm at one end and packed with 15 cm of Jupiter Proteo 4 μm C12 beads (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). A Kasil fritted trap was prepared using a 100-μm I.D. capillary tube packed with 2 cm of the identical C12 packing material, and 2 μL of sample was trapped at a flow rate of 1 μL/min for 8 min prior to going in-line with the packed tip. Peptides were separated over a 60-min linear reversed phase gradient ranging from 2 to 32% Buffer B (0.1%  w / v  formic acid in acetonitrile) mixed with Buffer A (0.1%  w / v  formic acid in water) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Quality control runs analyzed a six bovine protein digest (Bruker-Michrom, Auburn, CA) using a 30-min linear gradient. Q-Exactive   The capillary temperature was set to 300 °C. The S-Lens RF level was set to 50.0. The instrument was running the Q-Exactive 2.2 SP1 software. Data-Independent Acquisition   Three methods were used for DIA acquisition: 10, 20, and 20  m / z  with overlap. The 10  m / z  method was a repeating cycle of twenty 10  m / z  wide windows, covering the range from 500 to 700  m / z , as shown in Figure  1 A. The 20  m / z  method was a repeating cycle of twenty 20  m / z  wide windows, covering the range from 500 to 900  m / z , as shown in Figure  1 B. The 20  m / z  overlap method also used twenty 20  m / z  wide windows, but alternating cycles were offset by − 10  m / z , so that odd-numbered cycles covered windows from 500 to 900  m / z , while even-numbered cycles covered windows from 490 to 890  m / z  (Figure  1 C). All isolation window locations were optimized to place the edges into regions where peptide precursor ions are unlikely to occur [ 11 ]. In all methods, MS/MS DIA scans were taken at a resolving power (R.P.) of 17,500 at 200  m / z , a maximum fill time of 55 ms, an AGC target of 1 million ions, a default charge state of 2, and a normalized collision energy of 20.0. In all three methods, an MS survey scan was taken every 10 MS/MS scans, with R.P. 35,000 at 200  m / z , a maximum fill time of 55 ms, and an AGC target of 1 million ions. The scan range of the MS scan was 500–700  m / z  for the 10  m / z  method and 500–900  m / z  for the 20  m / z  methods. Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. Data-Dependent Acquisition   MS scans were acquired with R.P. 35,000 at 200  m / z , an AGC target of 1 million ions, and a maximum inject time of 10 ms in profile mode covering the range from 400 to 2000  m / z . MS/MS scans were acquired with R.P. 17,500 at 200  m / z , an AGC target of 200,000 ions, a maximum injection time of 55 ms, and a normalized collision energy of 23 in profile mode. The DDA method was a top-12 method, targeting the top 12 most abundant precursors for MS/MS after every MS scan. Unassigned and singly charged peptides were excluded from selection for MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was on with an exclusion time of 15 s and the “Exclude isotopes” feature enabled. Experiment Design   Each sample was analyzed using four acquisition methods—one DDA and three DIA (10, 20, and 20  m / z  overlap, see “ Data-Independent Acquisition ” above). The DDA runs were necessary to construct a spectral library for validation of peptide identifications from DIA data. In total, 120 runs were performed (4 analytical workflows, 3 biological replicates, 10 dilutions) excluding blanks and quality control (QC) runs. The runs were block-randomized. Each of the replicate sets consisted of all the spiked concentrations and acquisition methods. The three replicate sets were acquired sequentially. Within each replicate set, the concentrations were run in an increasing order, to avoid carryover effects. Within each concentration, the order of acquisition methods was randomized in order to avoid batch effects. A QC and two blank runs were conducted every 10 injections. A full run sheet of the experiment is shown in Supplementary Table  1 . One of the three technical replicates of the 4-fmol concentration in the 20  m / z  acquisition method was truncated at 55 min, causing 11 peptides to receive no measurement in that replicate. These peptides were excluded from the analysis (see “ Selection of Peptides and Precursors ”). Bovine Spike-In Experiment: Data Analysis   We used the bovine spike-in data to compare acquisition workflows based on metrics pertaining to selectivity, peptide detection, and peptide quantification. We used the automated mProphet [ 25 ] algorithm to compare the quality of peptide detection across the three DIA workflows. mProphet automatically selects the best chromatographic peak for each query peptide sequence (from the six spiked-in bovine proteins) and assigns a  q  value indicating the confidence in that peak annotation. We used the number of spike-in peptides detected by mProphet below a 1% false discovery rate cutoff as a metric for comparing peptide detection quality between different analytical workflows.   When comparing peptide quantification, we made efforts to avoid confounding the comparison with differences in peptide detection quality between each DIA workflow. To this end, we verified that the chromatographic peak selected for each peptide was within 2 min of its library DDA spectrum.   Selection of Peptides and Precursors   The three DDA runs at the highest spike-in concentration (96 fmol) were searched against all of these tryptic peptides using X!Tandem [ 26 ] and PeptideProphet [ 27 ] in CPAS [ 28 ]. Peptides were selected if they were identified at least once at PeptideProphet score > 0.95. Peptides that were outside of the analyzed  m / z  range (500–700 or 500–900  m / z ), less than 6 or greater than 25 amino acids, or contained missed cleavages were filtered from the analysis. There were 37 such peptides in the 500–700  m / z  range and 53 in the complete 500–900  m / z  range. A complete list of these peptides is shown in Supplementary Table  3 . Eleven of the detected peptides were removed from the analysis because they had retention time > 55 min and were thus truncated in the 20  m / z  4-fmol file (see “ Bovine Spike-In Experiment—Experiment Design ”).   Fragment ion extraction for these peptides was performed in Skyline, with demultiplexing applied on-the-fly in the case of overlapping window methods (see  Supplementary Methods  and  Supplementary Note ). Full Extracted Ion Current Analysis   To compare the precursor selectivity of the analytical workflows used in this manuscript, we analyzed the integrated intensity across the entire retention time profile of all extracted chromatograms (fragment ions) of interest, in each of the acquisition strategies. Raw chromatograms were exported from Skyline and the TotalArea column (which represents intensity integrated over time without background subtraction across the entire run for each fragment) was summed over all fragment ions and then averaged over peptides and replicates within each acquisition strategy. The resulting number (reported in the main results) represents the total intensity (integrated area) recorded at all fragment masses of interest for a given peptide, from zero retention time to the end of the run and is thus a measure of how selective the extracted chromatogram is for the desired peptide (fewer interfering ions means more selectivity). For this analysis, the single acquisition replicate that was truncated (20  m / z  at 4 fmol) was removed, and all 37 peptides between 500 and 700  m / z  were retained in the analysis (see “ Selection of Peptides and Precursors ”). Peptide Detection   For comparisons of peptide detection across acquisition methods, we used the Skyline implementation of the mProphet algorithm [ 25 ] with the peptides (and associated DDA spectra) described in the section “ Selection of Peptides and Precursors .” Spectral libraries were constructed from the three DDA runs at the highest spike-in concentration. The top 8 transitions from each library spectrum in Skyline were used as input transition peak groups to the feature scores. Decoy peptides were generated from reversed peptide sequences. Unless otherwise noted, only peaks within 5 min of the DDA spectrum retention time were considered by mProphet. The features used in the prediction were as follows: “Intensity,” “Retention time difference,” “Retention time difference squared,” “Library intensity dot-product,” “Shape (weighted),” “Co-elution (weighted),” “Co-elution count,” “Signal to noise,” “Product mass error,” “Precursor-product shape score,” “Precursor mass error,” and “Precursor isotope dot product.” A false discovery rate threshold of  q  < 0.01 was used for detection. Peptide Quantification and Limit of Quantification Analysis   We quantified and analyzed the lower limit of quantification (LoQ) of the spike-in dilution series at both the fragment and the peptide precursor ion level. Integrated peak areas were calculated by Skyline using peak boundaries chosen by a combination of mProphet and linear retention time alignment (see “ Peak Picking for Quantification ”). Peak areas in each LC-MS/MS run were normalized by integrated peak areas of a set of peptides from the background yeast matrix to correct for run-to-run variation in, e.g., LC column performance, ion source cleanliness, and sample load volume (see “ Peak Area Normalization ”). MSStats version 3.10.2 was used to calculate the lower limit of quantification from spike-in curve data based on the shape of the spike-in curve and reproducibility of replicate measurements [ 29 ].   Results at the peptide level were calculated by summing over the integrated areas of the top  N  most intense fragment ions from the DDA library spectra. Unless otherwise indicated, the top 5 most intense fragment ions were used. Only transitions from the  y  or  b -ion fragment ion series at index 3 to  n  − 2 with charge + 1 or + 2 and  m / z  < 1500 were considered. To determine the average LoQ of an acquisition method across many peptides, we took the geometric mean of the LoQ of each peptide because the LoQ may vary over several orders of magnitude between peptides. Bias was quantified for each peptide with each acquisition method as follows:   A calibration factor  D  between observed intensity ( I ) and true peptide concentration is calculated from the top 2 spike-in concentrations (32 and 96 fmol) and the mean of the intensities measured for the peptide at that intensity point:   D = 1 2 × 96 Mean I 96 + 32 Mean I 32     2. For any measurement with intensity  I  and true peptide concentration ( C ), the bias is then calculated as the absolute value of the log2 fold change between the “measured” concentration calculated from the intensities ( D  ×  I ) and the true concentration  C :     Bias at C = log 2 D × I C   Variability was quantified as the coefficient of variation of the intensity measurements across replicates. The bias and variability of peptide measurements were only calculated at concentrations that were above a fixed concentration cutoff for each peptide. The fixed concentration cutoff for each peptide was the maximum LLOQ observed for that peptide among the acquisition techniques being compared.   MS1-based quantification was accomplished by using the interlaced MS1 scans acquired once every 10 MS/MS scans (see “ Experiment Design ”) in the DIA data. We performed MS1 quantification using the sum of the integrated areas under the  M ,  M  + 1, and  M  + 2 isotope peaks. Peak Picking for Quantification   Peak boundaries for the bovine spike-in experiment were calculated using an algorithm to propagate peak integration boundaries from high spike-in concentration runs to lower concentration runs where the peptide may not be detected. First, unrefined peak boundaries were estimated by using the boundaries from an mProphet (see “ Peptide Detection ”) analysis in Skyline keeping only boundaries from detections with  q  < 0.01. Next, peak boundaries from runs where the peptide was detected are propagated to runs where the peptide was not detected. Boundaries are propagated using an alignment function generated from a weighted spline interpolation on common yeast background detections (see “ Peak Area Normalization ”) between a run where the peptide was detected and the one in which it was not. Finally, the peak boundaries are adjusted to a fixed width such that the width of each integrated peak in retention time is consistent between all measurements for a given peptide in an acquisition mode (i.e., 10, 20, or 20  m / z  + overlap). To accomplish this, the desired integration width is calculated as the maximum width observed for the peptide at the 96-fmol spike-in point. Additionally, a “reference spectrum” is calculated for the peptide by averaging the measured transition intensities at 96 fmol. For each run, the best location for the boundaries with the desired width is calculated by performing a local search around the existing boundaries (calculated by mProphet or propagation from mProphet results). The local search considers all peak boundary locations centered within ± 0.1 min of the existing location and calculates the optimal location as the one with the best least squares fit between the reference spectrum and the observed transition intensities at the potential center retention time. These peak boundaries are then imported back into the Skyline document. Peak Area Normalization   DDA runs acquired on the yeast background matrix with no spike-in were used to identify peptides that could be used for normalization. The LC-MS/MS runs were database searched using the Crux [ 30 ] pipeline with Comet [ 31 ] version 2015.01 rev2 and Percolator [ 32 ] version 2.09. The identified peptides were first filtered down to those with precursor charge 2 and precursor  m / z  between 500 and 700. The peak intensity was calculated for each of the candidate normalization peptides using Skyline [ 23 ]. For each peptide, the transitions used for quantification were the top 8 fragment ions measured in the reference peptide-spectrum match from the DDA data. The area under the curve of each of these transitions was extracted from the 10  m / z  wide window DIA data acquired on the yeast background (no spike-in) and summed to represent the signal from each peptide. Only the top 100 most intense peptides were kept as candidate normalization peptides.   Peak areas for each of these 100 peptides were extracted from every LC-MS/MS run in the bovine spike-in experiment using Skyline using the top 5 most intense transitions. For each analytical workflow, each normalization peptide was manually investigated and removed if it demonstrated poor signal, chemical noise interference, poor chromatography, or a potentially incorrect peak assignment in any of the LC-MS/MS runs. The 10, 20, and 20  m / z  overlapping (with demux) and 20  m / z  overlapping (without demux) workflows used 84, 81, 84, and 86 peptides for normalization, respectively.   For each LC-MS/MS run ( i ), the total normalization intensity ( N ) is calculated by summing up the integrated peak area of each normalization peptide ( k ):   N i = ∑ k = 1 n Area i , k   where  n  is the number of peptides used for normalization in LC-MS/MS run  i . Each run  i  has an associated analytical workflow:   Analytical workflow i ∈ 10 mz 20 mz 20 mz OverlapDemux 20 mz OverlapNoDemux   For each analytical workflow ( a ), the top normalization intensity (TNI) is calculated as:   TNI a = max N i