>Methods   The fundamental design of mzMLb is shown in  Figure  1 , with the full specification given in the  Supporting Information . As illustrated, an mzMLb HDF5 file is composed of data sets for different data types (numerical and text-based) contained within an mzML file. In this example with our ProteoWizard implementation, the data is stored in four HDF5 data sets: chromatogram start scan times (chromatogram_MS_1000595_double); chromatogram intensities (chromatogram_MS_1000515_float); spectrum  m / z ’s (spectrum_MS_1000514_double); and spectrum intensities (spectrum_MS_1000515_float). These data sets are accompanied by native HDF5 version mirroring the indexed mzML schema (e.g., mzML_chromatogramIndex and mzML_chromatogramIndex_idRef). It illustrates how mzMLb utilizes the advantages of mzML (XML) and proprietary binary vendor formats by combining the positive values of both approaches while mitigating the negative traits.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   mzMLb internal data structure. All data is stored using standard HDF5 constructs, PSI-standard mzML is maintained, and full XML metadata is stored, along with binary data in separate HDF5 data sets. Storage of the chromatogram and spectral data (scan start times,  m / z ’s, and intensities) is flexible and self-described in terms of floating-point precision and layout, relying simply on the data set name and offset being specified within the <binary> tag for each chromatogram and spectrum in the mzML XML metadata. The mzML XML metadata is stored inside a HDF5 character array data set “mzMLb.” This is identical to the mzML format except for the following: (a) The binary data is not stored within the <binary> tags; instead, the binary tag provides attributes for the name of the HDF5 data set containing the binary data, and the offset within the HDF5 data set where the data is located. This mechanism is also used in imzML and results in valid mzML. (b) If mzML spectrum and chromatogram indices are desired (i.e., an <indexed mzML> block in mzML), they are represented instead by native HDF5 data sets “mzML_spectrumIndex” and “mzML_chromatogramIndex,” which are one-dimensional arrays of 64-bit integers pointing to the start byte of each spectrum/chromatogram in the mzMLb. In addition, spectrum/chromatogram identifiers, spot ID (an identifier for the spot from which this spectrum was derived, if a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) or similar run), and scan start time indices can be specified as further HDF5 data sets (see the  Supporting Information ).   All numerical data that is Base64 encoded in mzML ( m / z ’s, intensities, etc.) is instead stored in mzMLb as native HDF5 data sets, either as floating-point (32-bit or 64-bit) or as a generic byte array if Numpress encoded. As each <binary> tag in the mzMLb data set specifies the name of the data set containing the data, each mzMLb implementation has the freedom to organize the binary data as it wishes. Since offsets can be specified, data from multiple spectra can also be colocated within the same HDF5 data set as long as they are of the same data type. This enables mzMLb to harness efficiency gains from HDF5 chunk-based random access and caching schemes and also reduces the file size as data will then be compressed across spectra (which is not possible in mzML). In our ProteoWizard reference implementation of mzMLb, chromatogram and spectrum data are kept apart, but otherwise all data for specific controlled vocabulary parameters (CVParam) are stored in the same data set. For example, in the data set in  Figure  1 , spectrum intensity values for all spectra are stored in the data set “spectrum_MS_1000515_float.”   We also implemented a simple coding scheme that combines data truncation, a linear prediction method, and use of HDF5’s inbuilt “shuffle” filter to improve the results of a subsequent compression step. The aim of this approach is to exploit the way numerical floating-point data is represented in binary natively on modern computing hardware, resulting in much better compression ratios. The method is lossy but like Numpress is designed only to add relative error at very small parts-per-million that does not affect downstream processing. Compared to Numpress, it is much easier to implement by third-party developers as the encoding and decoding can be implemented in a single line of code.   To fully appreciate its function and implementation, a basic understanding of how decimal real numbers are represented as binary floating-point numbers is required. A number in double-precision (64-bit) or single-precision (32-bit) binary floating-point 13  format consists of three parts: a sign, an exponent, and a mantissa, as represented in  Figure  2 . The sign bit represents a negative or positive number if set or unset, respectively (blue binary bit in  Figure  2 ). The exponent bits represent the scale of the number and hence specify the location of the decimal point within the number (orange binary bits in  Figure  2 ). Finally, the mantissa (green binary bits in  Figure  2 ) expresses the fractional part of the number—the number of bits in the mantissa hence gives you the number of significant figures. Having more bits in the exponent (11 bits in double precision compared to 8 bits in single precision) allows you to represent a wider range of numbers, whereas more bits in the mantissa (e.g., there are 52 bits in double precision vs 23 bits in single precision) allows more precision. If full precision is not required, then a large number of bits are stored unnecessarily, resulting in unnecessary memory and storage use. This is the case for a significant amount of the numerical data stored in conventional mzML files.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   (a) Visual representation of IEEE 754 double-precision (64-bit) floating-point format and IEEE 754 single-precision (32-bit) floating-point format; zeros are represented by empty boxes and ones are populated. (b) Array of floating-point numbers stored conventionally; yellow bytes can be compressed. (c) Same array truncated and stored using the HDF5 shuffle filter leads to higher compressibility. The pink arrows represent the order in which data is compressed; by reshuffling the order, a higher compression ratio can be achieved. We exploit this fact by implementing a simple lossy truncation scheme based on reducing the numbers of mantissa bits used in the floating-point format to represent  m / z  and intensity values by zeroing insignificant bits, with an example shown in  Table  1 . Here, we can see that we do not observe an appreciable drop in the parts-per-million accuracy of the decimal number until after we remove 21 bits from the mantissa, and it can be seen how zeroing more and more bits increases the error as we pass the single-precision (23 bits) mantissa level.   Table 1. Effect of Changing the Number of Bits Representing the Mantissa in a Floating-Point Number and the Associated Error a .     Open in a new tab     a The mantissa of a double-precision (64-bit) floating-point number (52 bits in the mantissa) and the mantissa of a single-precision (32-bit) floating-point number (23 bits in the mantissa) both are highlighted in green accordingly.   To translate our truncation approach into improved zlib 14  compression, it is necessary to employ HDF5 byte shuffling. In most formats, floating-point numbers are stored consecutively on disk, so zeroed mantissa bits appear in short bursts, as shown in  Figure  2 b. The HDF5 shuffle filter rearranges the byte ordering of the data so that it is stored transversely rather than longitudinally, as shown in  Figure  2 c. This leads to large numbers of consecutive zeros that can be compressed extremely well.   Moreover, further gains are possible by transforming the data so that consecutive values or sets of values are identical, as zlib is designed to compress away repeated patterns. Toward this goal, the mz5 format uses a “delta” prediction scheme that stores the difference between consecutive data points, rather than the data points themselves. This results in floating-point bit patterns ( Figure  2 ) that are less likely to change between consecutive data points and hence are more likely to be compressed. We present an improved technique termed “mzLinear” that extends this approach to a linear extrapolation predicting each data point from the two previous data points, with only the error between the prediction and the actual value stored. As there is often a quadratic relationship across  m / z  values (for example, since there is a quadratic relationship between time-of-flight and  m / z  for a standard time-of-flight analyzer), the aim of mzLinear is to result in an approximately constant prediction error across the  m / z  range, which will compress extremely well. In comparison, delta prediction on quadratic data would lead to prediction errors that rise linearly with  m / z . The technique and equation to calculate the stored error Δ h  is depicted in  Figure  3 , with the plot showing a numerical series of  m / z  values exhibiting a quadratic relationship and how the prediction error Δ h  remains constant for each value.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   mzLinear; linear predictor implemented in mzMLb, where  m / z n  =  y n  and the index  i n  =  x n , both  h 0  = 0 and  h 1  = 0 as the first value are stored in the new array and a linear equation can always be derived to intersect the first two points. However, for the rest of the data points,  h n +2 , where  n  = 0, 1, 2, ...,  N  – 2, is calculated by a linear predictor equation based on the previous two points and  N  is the total number of  m /z values. To demonstrate mzMLb across a broad spectrum of proteomics and metabolomics data sets used in different laboratories, we selected a wide variety of MS techniques and instruments from varying vendors. The data sets are depicted in the Supporting Information  Table S1 ; files 1–4 are from ref ( 8 ), data files 5–8 are from ref ( 15 ), 9 is from ref ( 16 ), 10 is from ref ( 17 ) 11 is from ref ( 18 ), and finally 12 is from ref ( 19 ). We tested mzMLb across different MS types, including SWATH-DIA, DDA, and selected reaction monitoring (SRM) data, and from the major vendors including Thermo, Agilent, Sciex, and Waters. Our implementation of mzMLb has been integrated into the open-source cross-platform ProteoWizard software libraries and tools and is available from  https://github.com/biospi/pwiz . Hence, the proprietary raw vendor files can be directly converted into mzMLb using the “msconvert” tool. Results   We first analyze the performance and generalizability of our truncated mzLinear coding method for  m / z  accuracy.  Figure  4  shows the effects of the change of mantissa on the data set, “AgilentQToF”; it can be seen that increasing truncation decreases the file size while having minimal effect on accuracy. The effectiveness of the mzLinear prediction clearly improves the zlib compression rates significantly across the range of possible truncations, as it is able to exploit the quadratic nature of the  m / z  to time-of-flight relationship.   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   mzMLb; mantissa truncation of the AgilentQToF data file, with truncation error and file size for both mzLinear enabled and disabled. The procedure was performed on all data sets tested, and the mantissa values were chosen such that the error induced by truncation would be less than or comparable to Numpress’ default values of <2 × 10 –4  and <2 × 10 –9  relative errors for the intensities and  m / z  values, respectively, which according to 8  are small enough so as to have no effect on the output of results on the downstream of a given workflow. The result of the relative errors can be seen in the Supporting Information,  Table S2 , where mzMLb produces higher compression ratios and hence smaller file sizes.   Since mzMLb’s truncation relative error is always less than that of Numpress, the validation that Numpress does not noticeably affect downstream processing 8  also 8  applies to mzML. Moreover, we expand this validation by compressing the AgilentQToF and QExactive data files (shown in  Table S1 ) and processing these files through a Mascot peptide search and protein inference workflow, the results of which can be seen in  Figure  5 . For the case of the AgilentQToF data, we found that Numpress was unable to produce exactly the peptide and protein lists as the original uncompressed data file. However, mzMLb was able to produce the same search and inference results for both the peptide/protein list as the original. Here, we can see that the relationship between the peptide  E -values of both mzMLb and Numpress against the original data set; mzMLb gives an injective mapping (a straight line) vs the original peptide  E -value, whereas the Numpress results are unable to produce the same injective relationship. The discontinuity of the Numpress results can be further illustrated by observing the peptides in the shaded regions of  Figure  5 c; the peptides highlighted in the enclosed box α represent the peptides that were present in both the original file and mzMLb but failed to be found in Numpress, whereas the peptides enclosed in the β region are peptides that were found in Numpress results but were not present in both the original and mzMLb results. The number of peptides deviating from the original file can be seen in  Figure  5 a; here, we see that Numpress did not perform quite as well as mzMLb as there are a small number of peptide score values deviating from the original data set. In  Figure  5 b,d, we can see the results of the same procedure on the QExactive file; here, we can see that mzMLb again produces an injective relationship with the original data set, i.e., producing the same results as the unmodified data set. Numpress in  Figure  5 b performs much better with an extremely low number of peptides showing Δ S  deviation. However, Numpress is still unable to produce exactly the same results as the original in the Mascot pipeline. It does, however, perform better than the AgilentQToF case and demonstrates that the lossy compression method employed in Numpress is more susceptible to different vendor data files, whereas the mzMLb truncation scheme is more robust to data file vendor variation and able to reproduce the same results as an unmodified data file. We thus take the most conservative truncation values from  Table S2  (AgilentQToF truncation values) and apply them as the mzMLb defaults.   Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Mascot peptide PSM search results of the original data set against both Numpress and mzMLb compression for AgilentQToF and QExactive datafiles. The top two plots show the number of peptides found in Numpress and mzMLb against the original data with the  x -axis representing the deviation (Δ S ) of the peptide score from the original. (a) For the Agilent file, here were can clearly see a number of peptide scores deviating from the original score for the Numpress case. (b) Results for the QExactive file, where the number of peptides deviating in the Numpress case is much less when compared to the number of matching peptides. In both cases, mzMLb outperforms Numpress and has virtually no peptides deviating from the original. The bottom two plots show the relative  E -value performance of both mzMLb and Numpress against the original data set, with (c) depicting the results for Agilent and (d) for the QExactive data file. The HDF5 binary data set chunk size can have a significant impact on access speed and file size. For the AgilentQToF file,  Figure  6  compares mzML with zlib, mzML with Numpress + zlib, and mz5 with zlib, to mzMLb across a range of chunk sizes.  Figure  6 a demonstrates write performance on a Linux workstation; Dell T5810, Intel Xeon CPU E5-1650 v3, with 32 GB RAM and 3 TB HDD running Ubuntu Linux v18.04. To produce these results, we ran ProteoWizard msconvert 10 times converting the files from vendor format while recording the write duration. However, modern operating systems including the Linux kernel employ a sophisticated file and memory caching system; to mitigate this mechanism accelerating the multiple writes and reads of the data files being tested, we cleared the Linux memory cache after every invocation of msconvert. It can be seen for lower chunking values, mzMLb (with both mzLinear ON/OFF) outperforms the other formats, and only starts to slow for a chunk size of around 512–1024 kb.  Figure  6 b shows the relative compression of the files as the chunking size increases (again for both mzLinear on/off). It can be seen that at 1024 kb the benefit of increasing the chunking size for compression of data is that it quickly plateaus while the writing speed deteriorates. The file sizes of mzMLb with mzLinear perform 77% better than mzML + zlib, 25% smaller than mzMLb + Numpress + zlib, and produce a 56% increase in compression when compared to mz5 + zlib.   Figure 6.     Open in a new tab   Chunk size optimization with mzLinear enabled; (a) mzMLb write benchmark times with varying chunk sizes, (b) file size with and without mzMLb enabled with varying sizes of HDF5 chunking, (c) random read benchmarks for singular spectrum access for full chunking size range, and (d) random read benchmarks for sequential block spectrum access for full chunking size range, with the default chunking size of 1024 highlighted in red. To evaluate the read performance of mzMLb, we created a C++ program readBench, which utilizes the PreoteoWizard API and its libraries to ensure the ability to read all file formats consistently under the same software implementation. This command line tool is available from  https://github.com/biospi/pwiz . Here, two scenarios were considered, the first accessing a spectrum for the data set 10 000 times at random. The second involved the random reading of 10 sequential spectra selected 1000 times at random, thus giving 10 000 total spectrum accesses. These were also performed 10 times for each data point. The results are depicted in  Figure  6 c,d; in both cases, mzMLb outperforms the other file formats while maintaining a smaller file size. Beyond 1024 kb chunk size, the random read time drastically increases.   Subsequently, we ran the random read benchmarks again but this time without zlib compression to evaluate use cases where fast access times are paramount and file size is not important. In this test, we include mzMLb in both a lossless and lossy scenario. Here, we introduced the HDF5 BLOSC ( http://blosc.org/ ) plugin to the validation. The aim of BLOSC is to perform modest but extremely fast decompression/compression so that the resulting read/write times are faster than using no compression at all as less data needs to be physically written to disk. It accomplishes this by: utilizing a blocking technique that reduces activity on the system memory bus; transmitting data to the CPU processor cache faster than the traditional, noncompressed, direct memory fetch approach via a memcpy operating system call; and leveraging SIMD instructions (SSE2 and AVX2 for modern CPUs) and multithreading capabilities present in multicore processors. BLOSC has a number of different optimized compression techniques including BloscLZ, LZ4, LZ4HC, Snappy, Zlib, and Zstd. Throughout these tests, we used BLOSC with LZ4HC compression, as we found it to be the most effective in terms of read and write speeds when dealing with MS data sets.   In  Figure  7 , we depict the results of our high-throughput results (utilizing the same data set as in  Figure  6 ) designed to seek out the optimum solution for the fastest access to MS data, in two categories: lossless file formats ( Figure  7 a,b) and lossy file formats ( Figure  7 c,d). In both cases, we consider both random single-spectra access ( Figure  7 a,c) and random block-sequential access ( Figure  7 b,d). We can see that in the case of lossless compression ( Figure  7 a,b) mzMLb performs better than both mzML and mz5 in both single and block-sequential data access. Moreover, when we utilize mzMLb with BLOSC LZ4HC compression, we can see that it significantly outperforms both mzML and mz5 at virtually all chunking sizes and particularly performs well at around 1024 kb chunks for both single and block-sequential scans. In the case of lossy data sets ( Figure  7 c,d), we can see that Numpress has a significant positive impact on random read times for both single and block-sequential data access. Notably, Numpress when coupled with a chunking size in the vicinity of the optimal value performs better when contained within mzMLb rather than mzML. Nevertheless, when we utilize both mzMLb with mzLinear and BLOSC