>Materials and Methods   Phosphopeptide samples     Saccharomyces cerevisiae  strain IFO 0233 cells grown continuously on glucose medium  [55]  were used. Pelleted cells were vacuum dried and frozen until further analysis. A Bioruptor UCW-310 (Cosmo Bio, Tokyo Japan) was used to disrupt the pellets in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) containing 8 M urea, protein phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 1 and 2 (Sigma), and protease inhibitors (Sigma). The homogenate was centrifuged at 1,500 g  for 10 min and the supernatant was reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with Lys-C; this was followed by dilution and trypsin digestion as described  [56] . Digested samples were desalted by using C-18 StageTips  [57] . Phosphopeptide enrichment by hydroxy acid–modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) was performed as reported previously  [11] ,  [58] . Briefly, digested lysates (100 µg each) were loaded onto a self-packed titania-C8 StageTip in the presence of lactic acid. After the samples had been washed with 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA, phosphopeptides were eluted by a modified approach using 5% ammonium hydroxide, 5% piperidine, and 5% pyrrolidine in series  [59] . LC-MS/MS analysis   An LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Germering, Germany) and an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics AG, Zwingen, Switzerland) was used for nanoLC-MS/MS analyses. An analytical column needle with a “stone-arch” frit  [60]  was prepared with ReproSil C18 materials (3 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The injection volume was 5 µL and the flow rate was 500 nL/min. The mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.5% acetic acid and (B) 0.5% acetic acid and 80% acetonitrile. A three-step linear gradient of 5% to 10% B in 5 min, 10% to 40% B in 60 min, 40% to 100% B in 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min was employed throughout this study. The MS scan range was  m / z  300 to 1500, and the top 10 precursor ions were selected in MS scans by Orbitrap with R = 60,000 for subsequent MS/MS scans by ion trap in the automated gain control (AGC) mode; AGC values of 5.00e+05 and 1.00e+04 were set for full MS and MS/MS, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set at 35.0. A lock mass function was used for the LTQ-Orbitrap to obtain constant mass accuracy during gradient analysis. Phosphosite identification   Both Mass Navigator v1.2 (Mitsui Knowledge Industry, Tokyo, Japan) and Mascot Distiller v2.2.1.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) were used to create peak lists based on the recorded fragmentation spectra. Peptides and proteins were identified by automated database searching using Mascot Server v2.2 (Matrix Science) against UniProt/SwissProt v56.0 with a precursor mass tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, and strict trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were allowed as variable modifications. Phosphopeptide identification and phosphorylated site determination were performed in accordance with a procedure reported previously  [11] . The false discovery rate was estimated to be 1.07% using a randomized database. All annotated MS/MS spectra were stored in PepBase ( http://pepbase.iab.keio.ac.jp ). Public phosphoproteome datasets     Saccharomyces cerevisiae  phosphoproteome data were obtained from Dataset S1 of Holt et al.  [16] . Another collection of formerly identified phosphoproteins and their phosphosites was obtained from UniProt (release 15.14;  http://www.uniprot.org/ )  [19] . All UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein entries identified to have at least one phosphosite in high-throughput phosphoproteomics studies were downloaded via the Protein Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) in XML format by querying the term  scope:  “ PHOSPHORYLATION [LARGE SCALE ANALYSIS] AT ”. Some phosphoproteins registered in UniProt had multiple synonyms of UniProt accession. Identifier standardization and data integration   For integrative analyses and comparisons of yeast multi-omics data, all identities of proteins and genes obtained from different data sources were standardized to UniProt accessions. If objects (e.g. gene names, ORF names, and/or locus names) in a data source did not have UniProt accessions, the objects were standardized to their corresponding UniProt accessions according to the cross-reference list prepared from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein entries obtained from UniProt (release 15.14). In cases when an object corresponded to multiple synonyms of UniProt accessions, all accessions were used to identify its corresponding objects in other data sources. Phosphoproteome data unification   The phosphoproteome data newly identified in this study and the former phosphoproteome datasets obtained from Holt et al. and UniProt were unified according to their UniProt accessions. Positions of phosphosites and their amino acid residues in the unified phosphoproteome data were double-checked by using the proteome sequences obtained from UniProt (release 15.14). Gene annotations   From SGD ( Saccharomyces  Genome Database;  http://yeastgenome.org )  [32] , annotations of 5,815 known and predicted genes were obtained. ORF names of genes were checked by using the unified phosphoproteome data to determine whether the encoded protein was identified as a phosphoprotein. PPI network   The  S. cerevisiae  PPI network was obtained as XML files (Scere20081014) from DIP (Database of Interacting Proteins;  http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu )  [33] . We eliminated each interaction entry including three or more “interactors” (e.g., in which multiple prey proteins were detected for one bait protein in one experimental assay) and used only those including two “interactors.” Every node in the PPI network was labeled by its corresponding UniProt ID provided in the same XML file. For the PPI assay, PPI data were further grouped into four categories: all kinds of experimental methods (“ALL”), yeast two-hybrid (“Y2H”), co-immunoprecipitation (“IMM”), and tandem affinity purification (“TAP”). A “filtered” PPI network was also prepared for each category by eliminating interactions between two similar proteins by using the BLASTP program and an E-value cut-off of 1e–10. Phospho-PPI   Unified phosphoproteome data were mapped onto every category of PPI data prepared from DIP according to their UniProt accessions, and a phospho-PPI network was generated. Throughout this study, proteins that did not correspond to phosphoproteome data were termed “nonphosphoproteins.” Negative control generation   To prepare negative controls for PPI and phospho-PPI networks, two different processes (as diagrammed in  Fig. 1 ) were appropriately adopted on a case-by-case basis. “Node label shuffling” (NLS) swaps the labels of two randomly selected nodes in a given network; it repeats this operation a sufficient number of times until all pair-wise interactions in the queried network have disappeared or until the number of iterations reaches 1,000 times the number of interactions. “Random edge rewiring” (RER) randomly selects two edges in a given network and randomly rewires them. During this process, each rewiring operation is retried if a pair of nodes redundantly wired by two edges occurs in the network; the iteration termination condition is the same as that of NLS. Proteome abundance data   Proteome abundance data for  S. cerevisiae  that were previously acquired through a single-cell proteomics analysis combining high-throughput flow cytometry and a library of GFP-tagged strains  [37]  were used to analyze the characteristics of protein expression in the phospho-PPI network. These data were composed of proteome abundance data measured for cells grown in rich (YEPD) and synthetic complete (SD) medium. For each cell growth condition, protein names were standardized to UniProt accessions, and protein abundance levels were log-transformed (base 10) and superimposed on each of the phospho-PPI networks of “ALL” and “Y2H.” In this case, protein nodes for which the abundance levels were not provided in the abundance data were deleted from the phospho-PPI network. Prediction of structured and unstructured proteins   The protein disorder level of every  S. cerevisiae  protein registered in UniProt (release 15.14) was predicted by the POODLE-W program, which uses the support vector machine–based learning of amino acid sequences of structurally confirmed disordered proteins  [61] . For the analysis, we used the “disorder probability” (i.e. the probability that a given protein is unstructured) output by this program. Gene Ontology     Saccharomyces cerevisiae  gene annotations belonging to “molecular function,” “biological process,” or “cellular component” of GO Slim, a higher level view of  S. cerevisiae  Gene Ontology (GO), were downloaded via the SGD ftp site. PPBD   Information on  S. cerevisiae  proteins, each of which has at least one of 10 known phosphoprotein binding domains (PPBDs), namely 14-3-3, BRCT, C2, FHA, MH2, PBD, PTB, SH2, WD-40, and WW  [49] , was obtained according to the protein domain annotations of UniProt (release 15.14), which were provided by other protein databases. Normalized probability of interaction with PPBDs   To evaluate the tendencies of phosphoproteins and nonphosphoproteins to interact with proteins that had PPBDs, the normalized probabilities of such interactions were defined. For each protein, the number of interacting protein partners that had PPBDs was divided by the number of all interacting partners. Collection of signaling reactions   To find possible IKMs, kinases previously reported to phosphorylate multiple substrates were obtained from data on  in vitro  substrates recognized by most yeast protein kinases that were measured with the use of proteome chip technology [Supplementary Data 2 of Ptacek et al.  [53] ], as well as from a literature-derived collection of documented yeast signaling reactions [ Table S3  of Fiedler et al.  [47] ]. All gene names of substrates in the  in vitro  kinase–substrate relationship data and ORF names of substrates in the literature-derived collection were standardized into UniProt accessions and linked to proteins in the “whole” and “filtered” PPI networks of the “ALL” category. Statistics   The statistical significance of differences in a single real value from a group of repeatedly generated random values was estimated by calculating the proportion of random values equal to the real value or more (or less, in certain instances). The Wilcoxon–Mann-Whitney rank sum was used to assess statistical significance between groups. Supporting Information     Figure S1 Contents of the phospho-PPI network generated for each experimental method used in the PPI assay. Numbers in parentheses indicate those derived by the “filtered” network.   (1.73 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (1.6MB, tif)      Figure S2 Differences between node degree levels of phosphoproteins and nonphosphoproteins of the “Y2H” phospho-PPI network at each level of protein abundance or protein disorder. See legend to  Fig. 4  for details.   (0.67 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (652.1KB, tif)      Figure S3 Comparison of abilities to predict phosphoproteins by node degree level and protein abundance level. (A) “ALL” PPI data and proteome abundance data measured for cells grown in YEPD medium. (B) “ALL” PPI and proteome abundance for cells grown in SD medium. (C) “Y2H” PPI and proteome abundance for cells grown in YEPD medium. (D) “Y2H” PPI and proteome abundance for cells grown in SD medium. For each predictor, the true-positive rate or “sensitivity” (defined here as the fraction of phosphoproteins correctly predicted to be phosphoproteins) and the false-positive rate or “1 – specificity” (defined here as the fraction of nonphosphoproteins incorrectly predicted to be phosphoproteins) are shown at a series of score thresholds.   (5.75 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (5.5MB, tif)      Figure S4 Differences between node degree levels of phosphoproteins and nonphosphoproteins at each level of protein size. See legend to  Fig. 4  for details. Analyses were performed for the phospho-PPI networks of “ALL” (A–C) and “Y2H” (E–F). Each bin corresponds to the protein length between  AA  and  AA +100 (amino acids). See legend to  Fig. 4  for details.   (0.44 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (431.1KB, tif)      Figure S5 Comparison of node degree counts of phosphoproteins and nonphosphoproteins in terms of yeast functional annotations. The type of phospho-PPI network is “ALL.” For proteins corresponding to each Gene Ontology annotation of “biological process” (A), “molecular function” (B) and “cellular component” (C) in the  S. cerevisiae  GO Slim set, the average node degree of phosphoproteins divided by that of nonphosphoproteins is represented as the P to N (P/N) ratio.   (2.10 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (2MB, tif)      Figure S6 Number counts of intersections between pair-wise protein relationships in the literature-derived signaling collection and in the PPI. For each category of PPI data, the number count of signaling reactions matched to protein interactions is represented by an arrow, along with  P  values estimated from negative controls generated by 10,000 repeats by RER. Gray bars represent the probability density distribution of the number count of the intersection observed using the negative controls generated by RER.   (0.24 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (230.1KB, tif)      Figure S7 Cumulative probability distributions of node degrees of nonphosphoproteins, phosphoproteins with a single phosphosite, and phosphoproteins with two or more phosphosites in the phospho-PPI data of the “ALL” category. For each dataset, bars show proportions of proteins with more than the  k  interacting partners indicated on the horizontal axis [ P ≥( k )].   (0.90 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (879.4KB, tif)      Figure S8 Number counts of interacting protein pairs of each phosphorylation pattern shown in the phospho-PPI networks of the “IMM” and “TAP” categories. See legend to  Fig. 6  for details.   (0.60 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (581.2KB, tif)      Figure S9 Number counts of IKMs formed in the “filtered” PPI network by each of the kinases shown in  Fig. 7 . For each kinase, arrows indicate number counts of IKMs formed by that kinase and the “filtered” PPI network, with  P  values estimated by comparison with negative controls. See legend to  Fig. 7  for details.   (0.90 MB TIF)       Click here for additional data file.  (881.5KB, tif)      Table S1 Phosphoproteome data used in this study.   (1.85 MB XLS)       Click here for additional data file.  (1.8MB, xls)      Table S2 List of known and predicted  S. cerevisiae  genes and phosphorylation annotation.   (0.47 MB XLS)       Click here for additional data file.  (462.5KB, xls)      Table S3 Phosphoproteome data used in this study.   (0.09 MB XLS)       Click here for additional data file.  (90KB, xls)    Acknowledgments   We thank our colleagues Yasuyuki Igarashi for experimental assistance in phosphoproteome identification, Kosaku Shinoda for maintaining the PepBase, and Dr. Douglas B. Murray for providing  S. cerevisiae  strain IFO 0233. We also thank Dr. Kana Shimizu at the Computational Biology Research Center (CBRC, Japan) for calculating yeast proteome disorders by using POODLE-W, and Dr. Frederick P. Roth at the Harvard Medical School for helpful discussions. Footnotes     The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.   This study was supported by research funds from Yamagata Prefecture and Tsuruoka City to Keio University; by a generous grant from the Naito Foundation to YI; and by a Grant-in-Aid for JSPS fellows from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) to NY (1924). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.   References       1. Hunter T. Signaling–2000 and beyond. Cell. 2000;100:113–127. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81688-8.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     2. Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S. The protein kinase complement of the human genome. Science. 2002;298:1912–1934. doi: 10.1126/science.1075762.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3. Pawson T, Nash P. Protein-protein interactions define specificity in signal transduction. Genes Dev. 2000;14:1027–1047.  [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     4. Aebersold R, Mann M. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Nature. 2003;422:198–207. doi: 10.1038/nature01511.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     5. Cravatt BF, Simon GM, Yates JR., 3rd The biological impact of mass-spectrometry-based proteomics. Nature. 2007;450:991–1000. doi: 10.1038/nature06525.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     6. Huang PH, White FM. Phosphoproteomics: unraveling the signaling web. Mol Cell. 2008;31:777–781. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.09.001.  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     7. Witze ES, Old WM, Resing KA, Ahn NG. Mapping protein post-translational modifications with mass spectrometry. Nat Methods. 2007;4:798–806. doi: 10.1038/nmeth1100.  [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [