>Materials and methods   Ethics statement   Ethical approval (M190555, M160640) was obtained from the Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. Patients provided written informed consent to be enrolled in the study. Sample and data collection   Tissues   Patients were recruited at Chris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital (CHBAH), Johannesburg, South Africa between April 2019 and December 2020. A total of 27 GBC tumours, 13 GD tissues, and 5 normal gallbladder tissues were used in the study. The inclusion criteria for the study were patients over 18 years of age, of African ancestry, with a clinical and histologically confirmed primary diagnosis of GBC or GD. All GBC tissues collected were identified to be advanced-stage (Stage IV) tumours according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer Staging Manual 8th Edition [ 28 ]. The exclusion criteria were patients who had an additional primary hepatopancreatobiliary disease diagnosis. A core sample of the tumour was obtained by Tru-cut ultrasound biopsy at the liver metastasis site, while the gallstone tissue was obtained via laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Non-diseased gallbladder tissues were used as normal samples and obtained from liver transplant donors. All tissues obtained were stored in approximately 700 µl of RNA later ™ (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and placed in a − 80 °C freezer until further processing was required. Blood   A separate cohort of patients presenting at CHBAH, Johannesburg, South Africa, were further recruited between February 2021 and October 2021. A total of 54 GBC and 73 benign biliary pathologies (BBP) patients were included in the study. The inclusion criteria for this GBC group were the same as those recruited for tissue samples. The inclusion criteria for the BBP group required patients to be over 18 years of age and to be clinically confirmed to have GD or cholecystitis. The exclusion criteria for both sample groups were patients who were diagnosed with any additional hepatopancreatobiliary diseases. Blood samples were collected in 10 ml EDTA vials and processed within 6 h of collection. Processing included separation into plasma by allowing the tube to stand erect. The plasma was then carefully transferred to a fresh 15 ml falcon tube and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 30 min to remove any debris. Thereafter, the plasma was aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C until required. The TNM staging and historical gallstone status for the GBC patients were recorded. There were missing data for 23 patients (38.89%) and 14 patients (25.9%) for TNM staging and historical gallstone disease status, respectively.   All demographic and clinical information was captured for each patient in REDCap (V.11.3.4, Vanderbilt University). Tissue homogenisation and protein extraction   Between 15 and 20 mg of the tissue was resuspended in a 500 µl ATL Lysis Buffer (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and homogenised using the Tissue Ruptor (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) until all the tissue was visibly in solution. The total volume was determined and 4× volume cold acetone (stored at  −20 °C) was added and incubated at − 20 °C for 60 min. Thereafter, the resulting precipitant was centrifuged at > 14,000× g  for 10 min. The pellet was washed with 100 µl ice-cold ethanol and the pellet dried for approximately 1 min. The pellet was resuspended in 200 µl 2% SDS in 50 mM Tris–HCl pH8 supplemented with PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The solution was then sonicated using probe sonication; 9 cycles of 10 s with 10 s on ice at 70% power. The solution was then centrifuged at > 14,000× g  for 10 min and the supernatant was transferred to a 0.5 ml Eppendorf tube. The centrifugation was repeated, and the protein was quantified using the 2-D Quant kit (Cytiva, Massachusetts, USA) as per the manufacturer’s instruction. Protein aggregated capture (PAC)   Protein aggregated capture (PAC) was performed on all tissue samples (GBC, GD, and normal tissues). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Thereafter, the proteins were alkylated with the addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (final concentration from 1 M stock solutions) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.   PAC was performed as previously described [ 29 ] with modifications (Additional file  8 : Table S1 for plate layout). MagReSyn™ Hydroxyl beads (ReSyn Biosciences, Edenvale, South Africa) were used for protein capture. A protein:bead ratio of 1:4 (by weight) was used for PAC; 20 µg of protein was used per sample and trypsin was used in a ratio of 1:10 (protease:protein) for digestion (4 h at 37 °C). Acetonitrile (ACN) (final concentration of 70%) was used for on-bead protein aggregation which was allowed to occur for 10 min without agitation. The PAC protocol, including on-bead digestion, was automated on a KingFisher™ Duo (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) purification system. Once completed, the plate was transferred to a magnetic rack to recover digested peptides. The peptides were transferred to a 0.5 ml protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and recovered volumes were determined. Digestion was terminated by the addition of TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) to a final of 0.5%. The samples were frozen at − 80 °C and dried at − 4 °C using a CentriVap vacuum concentrator (Labconco, Missouri, USA). The peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.2% Formic Acid and quantified using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colourimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) as per the manufacturer’s instruction. Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC)   Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) was performed on all plasma samples. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Thereafter, the proteins were alkylated with the addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. A total of 30 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated and added to the HILIC binding buffer in a 1:1 ratio (200 mM NH 4 Ac, 30% ACN, pH 4.5).   MagReSyn™ HILIC beads (ReSyn Biosciences, Edenvale, South Africa) were used for protein capture, and a protein:bead ratio of 1:4 (by weight) was utilised. The beads were then equilibrated using equilibration buffer (100 mM NH 4 Ac, 15% ACN, pH 4.5), followed by protein binding onto the HILIC beads for 30 min. Thereafter, two washes using 95% ACN were performed. Following the washes, digestion was performed using trypsin and endoproteinase Lys-C (1:20 and 1:100 ratio of protease:protein, respectively). Digestion occurred for 2 h at room temperature. Once digestion was completed, the enzyme digestion was terminated using 1% TFA. The HILIC protocol was performed using an automated KingFisher™ Flex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) purification system [ 27 ]; each step was performed in a fresh 96-deep well plate. Once the digestion was completed and terminated, the peptides were recovered using a magnetic rack and transferred to fresh 0.5 ml protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The samples were frozen at - 80 °C and then dried at − 4 °C using a CentriVap vacuum concentrator (Labconco, Missouri, USA). The peptides were then resuspended in 2% ACN and 0.2% Formic Acid and quantified using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colourimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) as per the manufacturer’s instruction. High pH reverse phase fractionation   For high pH reverse phase (RP) fractionation, an aliquot of each prepared GBC and GD samples were pooled together in their respective groups (~ 30 µg of each pool used for high pH RP fractionation). A linear gradient of 5 – 45% Solvent B (Solvent A: 20 mM NH 4 OH; Solvent B: 20 mM NH 4 OH/80% ACN) over 10 min at a flow-rate of 75 µl min −1  was employed on a Hypersil GOLD C18 column (1 mm × 15 cm, 3 μm particle size) maintained at 50 °C to fractionate the pooled samples; fractions were collected at 30-s intervals between 13 and 23 min. Appropriate fractions were collected and concatenated together (Additional file  1 : Fig. S1, Additional file  8 : Table S2), concentrated using a CentriVap vacuum concentrator (Labconco, Missouri, USA), and resuspended before LC–MS injection. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC–MS) data acquisition   Tryptic peptides (~ 500 ng for sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH) analysis of each sample were analysed using a Evosep One LC system (using Evotip C18 trap column loading system) coupled to an AB Sciex 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Massachusetts, USA). Peptide samples were separated on an Evosep performance column (8 cm × 150 µm) packed with 1.5 µm Dr Maisch C18 beads. The column was maintained at 35 °C using the 60SPD method. The peptides were then eluted over 21 min with a gradient of 0–35% Solvent B (Solvent A: 0.1% Formic Acid; Solvent B: 100% ACN/0.1% Formic Acid).   For data-dependent (concatenated fractions) acquisition (DDA), ~ 500 ng of tryptic peptides of each sample were analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to an AB Sciex 6600 Triple TOF mass spectrometer. Peptide samples were inline desalted using an Acclaim PepMap C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm; 2 min at 5 μl min −1  using 2% ACN/0.2% FA). Trapped peptides were gradient eluted and separated on a Waters Acquity CSH C18 NanoEase column (75 μm × 25 cm, 1.7 μm particle size) maintained at 45 °C at a flow-rate of 0.3 μl min −1  with a linear gradient of 4 – 40% Solvent B over 45 min (Solution A: 0.1% Formic Acid; Solvent B: 80% ACN/0.1% Formic Acid). Precursor (MS) scans were acquired from  m/z  400–1500 (2 + –5 +  charge states) using an accumulation time of 200 ms followed by 40 fragment ion (MS/MS) scans, acquired from  m/z  100–1800 with 20 ms accumulation time each. For SWATH, precursor scans ranged from  m/z  400–900 using an accumulation time of 100 ms, and fragment ions were acquired from  m/z  100–1800 with 15 ms accumulation time per window across 60 variable-width windows that overlapped by 0.5 Da. LC–MS data processing   A spectral library was built in Spectronaut v16 (Biognosys Schlieren, Switzerland) using the Pulsar search algorithm. Specific trypsin digestion was used for the enzyme setting. A peptide length of 7–52 was used and 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was added as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were added as variable modifications. A Swissprot Human FASTA file (downloaded on 12 June 2021) including common contaminating proteins was used as the search database. For DIA analysis, the standard identification and quantification settings were used for data processing except for data filtering which was set at q-value percentile (0.5 fraction) without imputation (i.e., precursors need to be identified in at least 50% of runs to be included in the analysis). A q-value ≤ 0.05 cut-off was applied at the precursor peptide and protein levels. Quantification was performed at the MS2 level. Label-free cross-run normalization was employed using a global normalization strategy. Retrospective power analysis   To determine the appropriate fold-change cut-off, a retrospective power analysis was performed using the MSstats package (Northeastern University, MSstats 4.4.1 (Bioconductor version: Release 3.15, R v4.2.0). The dataProcess function was performed first to normalise the output data from Spectronaut (fragment level peak area of all identified proteins). Thereafter, the groupComparison function was performed to compare the protein changes between GBC, GD, normal, and BBP groups. Finally, the designSampleSize function was applied; this function determines the minimum number of replicates required to achieve a desired statistical power. The parameters were FDR = 0.05, and n = minimum sample size for each comparison (5 for GBC vs normal, 13 for GBC vs GD and 54 for GBC vs BBP plasma). At power = 0.8, proteins that show a fold-change ≥ 5.2, ≥ 2.775, and ≥ 1.6 are significantly dysregulated for the GBC vs Normal, GBC vs GD, and GBC vs BBP plasma comparisons, respectively. Pathway and network analysis   Pathway analysis was performed on all the significantly dysregulated proteins identified to determine enriched pathways. REACTOME (v3.7) [ 30 ] was used for pathway analysis, and the top 10 significantly (p < 0.05) enriched pathways were selected. Network analysis and visualisation were performed using Cytoscape (v3.8.2) [ 31 ] and stringAPP (v1.7.0) [ 32 ]. The proteins were queried with filters including Species:  Homo sapiens  and zero additional interactors. Within the network, single non-interacting proteins were excluded. The identified dysregulated proteins were also inputted onto the PANTHER™ Classification System (v17.0) to identify the molecular functions of target proteins [ 33 ]. Statistical analysis   The demographic and clinical characteristics were analysed using R (V4.0.2 and R Studio v1.4.1717). All data were nonparametric and a p < 0.05 was considered significant. The categorical and continuous data were analysed using the Fisher’s Exact and Mann–Whitney U Tests, respectively. Using Statistica (v13.5) a Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA by Ranks with post-hoc analysis was performed to determine any associations between dysregulated protein expression and sex age range. An unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using PAST (V4.07b) on the commonly dysregulated proteins between tissue and plasma in GBC patients. For the PCA, a correlation matrix was used to explain the maximal variance in samples that would permit delineation of the disease contexts. Significant loadings for PCA analysis were determined using the following equation:   1 n v a r i a b l e s - 1 .   The values generated by the equation were used to determine the positive and negative significant loadings for PCA analysis. Thereafter, a Spearman’s Rank Correlation test was conducted to determine whether protein expression correlated across the sample types. Moreover, hierarchical clustering analysis was performed on all the differentially expressed proteins for each of the group comparisons. The hierarchical clustering analysis generated on Spectronaut was used for this analysis. A summary of the methods used is shown in a flowchart represented in Fig.  1 .   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   Flow chart of the summary of methods used. SWATH-MS analysis was used to profile biosamples from patients with gallbladder cancer and benign biliary pathologies, such as gallstone disease. Proteins dysregulated in gallbladder cancer patients were identified. Subsequently, pathway and statistical analyses were conducted Results   Clinical and demographic characteristics of patients   The differences in the routine clinical blood tests performed between the independent patient cohorts are shown in Additional file  8 : Tables S3 and S4. Majority of the GBC patients presented with adenocarcinomas. As expected, liver function tests such as total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), gamma-glutamyl transcriptase (GGT), and aspartate transaminase (AST) were elevated in gallbladder cancer patients. Furthermore, the clinical inflammatory markers, white cell count (WCC) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were both raised in GBC patients. The TNM staging and GD history for each patient in the GBC plasma cohort are shown in Additional file  8 : Table S5. A total of 14 (25.9%) patients had a history of GD, 26 (48.2%) patients had no history of GD, and 14 (25.9%) patients had an unknown history. SWATH-MS analysis of tissue and plasma cohorts   The project-specific spectral library was built in Spectronaut v16 using the Pulsar search algorithm. There were 87,341 precursors, 65,725 modified peptides, 62,204 peptides, and 57,435 proteotypic peptides identified in tissue spectral library. The identified peptides matched to 6204 protein groups. In the GBC/Normal comparison, SWATH-MS identified 36,606 peptides matching 2955 proteins groups across all runs; there were 12,527 peptides matching 1834 protein groups in common across 50% of the total runs. For the GBC/GD group, there were 36,830 peptides matching 2951 protein groups across all runs; and there were 11,261 peptides matching 1674 protein groups in common across 50% of the runs. In the GBC/BBP group, 3310 peptides matching 260 protein groups were present in the custom-built spectral library and there were 2577 peptides matching 226 protein groups which were in common across 50% of the total runs. Details of precursors, peptides and protein groups for each study sample is described in supplementary tables (Additional file  8 : Tables S6, S7, S8).   There were a total of 62 proteins dysregulated (38 upregulated and 24 downregulated) in the GBC/Normal group (Additional file  8 : Table S9), 194 dysregulated proteins (88 upregulated and 106 downregulated) in the GBC/GD group (Additional file  8 : Table S10), and 33 dysregulated proteins (12 upregulated and 21 downregulated) in the GBC/BBP group (Additional file  8 : Table S11). A sub-analysis was further performed to compare GBC patients with GD history with those without a history of GD and showed two proteins, S100A8 and S100A9, were downregulated in patients with GD history compared to those without GD history. Commonly dysregulated proteins between the tissue and plasma cohorts   Furthermore, we identified proteins that were commonly and uniquely dysregulated across the different patient groups (Fig.  2 ). There were 24, 149, and 24 dysregulated proteins unique to GBC/Normal, GBC/GD, and GBC/BBP sample groups, respectively. There were 38 dysregulated proteins common to the GBC/Normal and GBC/GD tissue groups. Seven proteins (Apolipoprotein A-1 (APOA1), Apolipoprotein A-2 (APOA2), Retinol-binding protein 4 (RET4), Transthyretin (TTR), Hemopexin (HEMO), Haemoglobin subunit alpha (HBA), Haemoglobin subunit beta (HBB)) were common between GBC/GD and GBC/BBP groups. Also, two proteins were common among all three groups, these are Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) and Apolipoprotein E (APOE) (Additional file  8 : Table S12). Henceforth, we will collectively refer to these 9 proteins as “Commonly dysregulated proteins (CDPs)”. These CDPs are dysregulated in the same direction (either upregulated or downregulated) across the sample types (tissue and plasma). Additionally, a subset analysis was conducted on the dysregulated proteins in GBC plasma patients to identify proteins with significant alteration in the different tumour staging. Only one protein was significantly altered; APOE and Inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H3 (ITIH3) were significantly elevated in non-metastatic (Stage I, II, and III) GBC plasma patients compared to metastatic (Stage IV) (Additional file  8 : Table S13). Also, a Kruskal–Wallis H test was performed to determine if age and sex had any effect on protein expression and it was determined that they did not affect the expression of the CDPs. The Log 2  quantities for the CDPs of each patient are shown in Additional file  2 : Fig. S2 and Additional file  3 : Fig. S3.   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Venn diagram for common dysregulated proteins among sample group comparisons. There is a total of 62, 194, and 33 identified dysregulated proteins across GBC/Normal tissue, GBC/GD tissue, and GBC/BBP plasma groups, respectively. There are commonly dysregulated proteins as indicated by the overlaps. The Venn diagram was generated using Venny (v2.1.0) Pathway and network analyses of differentially expressed proteins   Pathway analysis was performed to help identify the molecular pathways in which the dysregulated proteins are involved (Fig.  3 ). The top downregulated pathway for GBC/Normal is smooth muscle contraction. The top upregulated pathways are integrin cell surface interactions, extracellular matrix organisation, and metabolism. Like the GBC/Normal group, the top downregulated pathways for GBC/GD are smooth muscle contraction, and cell-extracellular matrix interactions. Both the upregulated and downregulated proteins in the GBC/GD group showed enrichment in metabolism and extracellular matrix organisation pathways. For the GBC/BBP group, the dysregulated proteins were shown to be involved in platelet degranulation, haemostasis, and innate immune system pathways. Additionally, network analysis demonstrated that there was a variety of interactions between the CDPs and only PIGR was not involved in the network (Fig.  3 D).   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Pathway and network analyses of dysregulated proteins. Network and dysregulated pathways of  A  Gallbladder cancer tissue compared to normal gallbladders.  B  Gallbladder cancer tissues compared to gallstone tissues.  C  Gallbladder cancer plasma compared to benign biliary pathologies plasma samples. The colour change is determined by the average Log 2  fold change of the protein.  D  Network analysis shows the intricate relationships between the CDPs. Red and blue indicate downregulated and upregulated proteins in GBC across the groups, respectively To determine pathways that may be unique to GBC, pathway analysis was first performed on the resulting 38 commonly dysregulated proteins from the GBC/Normal and GBC/GD tissue groups (Additional file  4 : Fig. S4). The analysis showed the downregulation of the smooth muscle contraction pathway in GBC tissues. Then, another analysis investigating pathways commonly enriched by the proteins (CDPs) found to be dysregulated at both the tissue and plasma level, demonstrated that pathways associated with metabolism were the most enriched. In addition, the gene ontology enrichment analysis for dysregulated proteins for all the groups determined that the molecular functions of most of the proteins are related to binding and catalytic activities (Additional file  5 : Fig. S5). Hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis, and Spearman’s rank correlation test of the CDPs   Hierarchical clustering was performed on all of the quantified proteins for GBC/Normal, GBC/GD, and GBC/BBP (Additional file  6 : Fig. S6). The tissue groups showed distinct clustering by condition (tumour and control), however, the conditions for the plasma dataset showed some overlap.   Thereafter, to determine the ability of the CDPs to distinguish between GBC and control, and to reduce data dimensionality, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed. Visually, GBC tissue (black) and GBC plasma (red) samples showed considerable overlap following the reduction of dimensionality (Fig.  4 A). Specifically, the two principal components (PCs) that were generated accounted for 67.37% of the variation. GBC tissue and plasma clustering was influenced by PC1 (44.76% variation) with strong contributions from APOA1, APOA2, RET4, and TTR. As mentioned previously, there are specific interactions between APOA1, APOA2, RET4, and TTR as indicated by the network analysis (Fig.  3 D). Moreover, the relationship between GBC tissue and plasma was delineated from GD and BBP on the vertical axis (PC2; 22.61% variation) by strong positive influences from HBB and HBA and a negative influence from HEMO (Fig.  4 B).   Fig. 4.     Open in a new tab   Principal component analysis and Spearman’s Rank Correlation Test for "Commonly dysregulated proteins (CDPs)".  A  The scatterplot indicates PC1 vs PC2 of the CDPs. Black dots indicate GBC tissue patients, red dots indicate GBC plasma patients, blue dots indicate GD patients and grey dots indicate BBP patients.  B  The loadings for the CDPs for each PC. Green highlighted values are significantly positive loadings and red highlighted values are significantly negative loadings.  C  The Spearma