>Methods   Study participants   Cohort description has been previously published by Ziegler et all ( 24 ). In summary, eligible participants were recruited from to the University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC) outpatient clinics, medical surgical units, Intensive Care Units (ICU), or endoscopy units between April 2020 and September 2020 ( Supplemental Table 1 ). The UMMC Institutional Review Board approved the study under IRB#2020–0065. All participants, or their legally authorized representative provided written informed consent. Participants were eligible for inclusion in the COVID-19 cohort if they were at least 18 years old, had a positive nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 by PCR, had COVID-19 related symptoms including fever, chills, cough, shortness of breath, and sore throat, and weighed more than 110 lb. Participants were eligible for the Control cohort if they were at least 18 years old, had a current negative SARS-CoV-2 test (PCR or rapid antigen test), and weighed more than 110 lb. Exclusion criteria for both cohorts included a history of blood transfusion within 4 weeks and subjects who could not be assigned a definitive COVID-19 diagnosis from nucleic acid testing. 10 individuals with COVID-19 were included, both male (n = 5) and female (n = 5). For the Control cohort, 10 participants were included 4 identified as male, 6 as female. The median age of COVID-19 participants was 59.5 years old; the median age of Control participants was 62 years old. Among hospitalized participants, samples were collected between Day 1 to Day 3 of hospitalization. COVID-19 participants were classified according to the 8-level ordinal scale proposed by the WHO representing their peak clinical severity and level of respiratory support required. Plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) collection and isolation   Blood samples were collected by trained healthcare provider using 10 mL heparinized tubes. Collectors would don personal protective equipment (PPE), including a gown, non-sterile gloves, a protective N95 mask, a bouffant, and a face shield for the COVID positive samples. For plasma isolation the blood was centrifuged at 1200 ×g for 10 minutes at room temperature, then collected and stored in −20°C until analysis. For PBMC isolation Ficoll-Paque PLUS density gradient media was added to SepMate 50 mL tubes and then the blood. This was then centrifuged at 1200 ×g for 10 minutes at room temperature. The top layer was transferred to a new 50 mL SepMate tube and then centrifuged at 300 ×g for 8 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was removed and the cells washed with 10 mL of 1x PBS. This was then centrifuged at 300 ×g for 5 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was removed at the cells resuspended in 1 mL of CryoStor CS10 freezing media. The PBMCs were then slowly frozen using Mr. Frosty in −80°C and then transferred to liquid nitrogen until analysis. Lipid composition measurements by Mass Spectrometry   Lipid extraction was done on each plasma sample. Samples were homogenized in 500  μ L of 10% methanol in water and 200  μ L of the homogenates were extracted by a modified BUME method. Extracts were dried and saponified using a 1:1 MeOH:KOH solution at 37°C for 30 minutes. Fatty acids were extracted by a bi-phasic solution of acidified methanol and isooctane, derivatized using PFBB, and analyzed using SIM by GC-MS on an Agilent 6890N gas chromatograph equipped with an Agilent 7683 autosampler. Fatty acids were separated using a 15m ZB-1 column (Phenomenex, Le Pecq, France) and monitored using SIM identification ( 25 , 26 ). Lipidomics analysis   To analyze lipidomic profiles, we first performed Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to visualize variance in our data and whether this variance was associated with difference in clinical outcome. PCA uses dimensional reduction to identify the largest drivers of variance across the entire dataset, termed principal components (PC), and then generates a per sample score, reflective of expression of the components, for each PC. PC1 and PC2, the two largest drivers of variance, are then mapped onto a 2-D plot. This allows the researcher to investigate high dimensional datasets in the two dimensions which most accurately account for the variance in the data. For heatmaps, raw metabolomic data was log2 transformed. A value of 1 was added to all raw data so that undetected (0) samples could still be log2 transformed. The package ‘pheatmap’ was then used to generate row normalized heatmaps based on the log2 transformed lipidomics data. Samples were clustered using Euclidean distance and annotated based on key clinical parameters. Significantly differentially expressed metabolites were assessed using Mann-Whitney U-tests. An asterisk (*) was used on heatmaps to identify lipid metabolites which were statistically significantly different. Spearman correlations were run to identify lipid metabolites which were positively or negatively correlated with WHO disease severity score. Network visual was made in Cytoscape by importing lipid metabolites, rho of each metabolite compared to WHO disease severity, and the corresponding p-value for each correlation ( 27 ). A network was then made around WHO disease severity in which the color (red) of the connecting line reflects the degree of correlation and the thickness of the connecting line represents the −log10 transformation of the p-value. The thicker and darker red a connecting line, the stronger and more significant the correlation. RNA isolation and bulk RNA Sequencing.   PBMCs from both control patients (n=10) and COVID-19 infected patients (n=10) were used. After isolating the PBMCs the RNA was isolated using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA sequencing was performed by the UMMC Molecular and Genomics Core Facility ( www.umc.edu/genomicscore ). Libraries were developed using the Illumina TruSeq mRNA Stranded Library Prep Kit (Set-A-indexes), quantified with a Qubit fluorimeter (Invitrogen), and assessed for quality and size using the QIAxcel Advanced System. Samples were pooled into a single library and sequenced using the NextSeq 1000/2000 P2 Reagents (200 cycles, paired-end 100bp) on the Illumina NextSeq 2000 platform. Quality of the sequenced reads was assessed using the Illumina BaseSpace Cloud Computing Platform. FASTQ sequences were aligned to the Human genome [GRCh38 (884148)] using an RNA-Seq Alignment Application (DRAGEN v3.7.5). Differential expression was determined using the DRAGEN Differential Expression Application (v4.0.3) and DESeq2. Gene expression differences are expressed as log2 fold change (ratio) and q>0.05. RNA-seq analysis   Sequenced reads were assessed for quality using FastQC. We identified multiple samples which showed potential QC issues based on GC content, duplication levels and overrepresented sequences. None of these were deemed likely to impact the efficiency of sequencing alignment so all samples were processed further. Raw FASTQ sequence files were used to align reads to the GRCh38 human genome using the Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Reference (STAR) method ( 28 ). All samples had >75% of reads mapped to unique locations in the human genome. STAR was also used to generate the raw read counts. One sample, COVID-19+ sample #394, was removed from further analysis following STAR alignment as it was overrepresented with genes with low read count values suggesting some error in isolation, processing or sequencing. Raw read counts were then normalized using the trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) method and QC’d again using FastQC ( 29 ). All samples passed QC after normalization of read counts. Differential gene expression was then performed on normalized read counts using the voom method ( 30 ), as deployed in the package limma ( 31 ). Significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified for the comparisons between 1) COVID-19 high disease severity and COVID-19 low disease severity groups and 2) COVID-19 samples vs. healthy control samples. All DEGs pass an adjusted p-value of <0.05. A combination of PCA plots, volcano plots and row normalized heatmaps were used to visualize DEGs between groups of interest. Networks of DEGs were created to show their association to one another using GeneMANIA. Pathway enrichment analysis to identify immunological and cellular pathways enriched for DEGs was performed in ClueGO. Spearman correlations were used to identify the transcriptional genes and pathways (ClueGO) which positively and negatively correlated with: 1) the magnitude of disease severity by WHO score and 2) the levels of circulating Eicosapentaenoic Acid (EPA), a key inflammatory lipid identified in our analysis. GeneMANIA to visualize differentially expressed genes   For granular identification and listing of differentially expressed genes, the GeneMANIA application in Cytoscape was used to make networks ( 32 ). For each set of differentially expressed genes of interest, the list was imported into GeneMANIA. A network was then built based off of the list of genes, connecting them based on published/known Co-expression, Co-localization, Genetic Interactions, Pathway, Physical interactions, Predicted, and Shared protein domains. This visual network identifies all the genes by name and shows how they are known to be connected to one another. Performing network-based pathway enrichment using ClueGO   To fully leverage the RNA-sequencing data in this study, we performed pathway enrichment analysis in order to identify the immunological and cellular pathways which show significant enrichment for genes significantly modulated between two groups or which significantly correlated with disease severity. For this, we used an application called ClueGO in Cytoscape ( 33 ). This function allows the user to input a list of significantly modulated genes and then uses Fisher’s exact testing to identify the pathways which show statistically significantly higher enrichment for genes from the input list than would be expected at random from the genome. Pathways were taken from the Gene Ontology (GO) ( 34 ), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) ( 35 ) and Reactome databases ( 36 ). Then an additional step is taken to produce a network-based analysis by using kappa statistics to identify pathways have significant overlap in enriched genes and then grouping these together into distinct functional nodes (color coded individually) to identify groups of pathways with similar and/or redundant function. To accomplish this, ClueGO using a matrix of genes with associated terms (pathways) and calculates a similarity matrix using kappa statistics to identify terms (pathways) which shows the strength of association between terms (pathways) based on containing the same enriched genes. The kappa score can be tuned from 0 to 1 to increase or restrict network connectivity as needed. Consolidating redundant pathways into nodes provides easier network visualizations to demonstrate multiple key changes in immunology and/or cellular function. We utilize this powerful and open-source tool in order to dig into our transcriptional data and identify the main immunological impacts of changes in the circulating lipid profile and transcriptional profile from individuals with differing degrees of COVID-19 disease severity. Results   Increased expression of genes involved in the synthesis of PUFAs-derived lipid mediators is increased in the nasopharyngeal mucosa of patients with high WHO score   We re-analyzed data from nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs collected from 58 individuals from the University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC) between April and September 2020. Full cohort details can be found in a previous publication ( 24 ). Quantitative PCR analysis of NP swabs in this patient’s cohort revealed that arachidonate 5-lipozygenase 5 ( alox5 ) a gene that utilize PUFAs a substrate to generate leukotriene, a family of eicosanoid inflammatory mediators, is over-represented in mast cells ( Fig. 1A ). However, recent studies show that  alox5  plays also an active role in the synthesis of specialized pro-resolving mediators (SPMs) a large class of signaling molecules implicated in the resolution of inflammation ( 37 ).  Alox15 , another arachidonate 5-lipozygenase enzyme is widely distributed in most cell types of the naso-pharynx, including ciliated cells, developing secretory and goblet cells and goblet cells but excluded form mast cells ( Fig. 1A ). Both  alox15  and  alox15B  play a major role in the synthesis of the SPMS lipoxins and resolvins. Specifically, violin plot analysis revealed that  alox15  is predominantly expressed in COVID-19 patients with high WHO score ( 6 – 8 ) in developing ciliated cells, goblet cells, deuterosomal cells, Ionocytes and developing secretory and goblet cells ( Fig. 1B ). Confirming the implication of SPMs synthesizing gene expression in COVID-19 patients with high WHO score, we detected a high expression in goblet cells of phospholipase A2 group IVA ( pla2G4a ), a gene implicated in the hydrolysis of membrane phospholipids to release arachidonic acid to be subsequently metabolized in eicosanoids ( Fig. 1C );  alox15B  and  aloxE3 , another lipoxygenase enzyme that in humans form a cluster of enzymes with  alox12  and  alox15B  on chromosome 17. These results may implicate that upon severe COVID-19 infection, developing and secretory goblet cells and mature goblet cells will actively synthesized SPMs as a mean of fighting the inflammation resulting from SARS-CoV-2 infection.   Figure 1: Expression of resolving synthesizing enzymes in covid-19 patients.     Open in a new tab   (A) Expression of alox enzymes and other fatty acid related genes. Dot size represent fraction of cell type (rows) expressing a given gene (columns). Dot hue represent scaled average expression by gene column. (B) Select differentially expressed genes between control non- SARS-CoV-2 cells and SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells from participants with control WHO score of 0 in dark blue; control WHO score of 0 in light blue; COVID-19 convalescent patients in black; mild or moderate COVID-19 in red and severe COVID-19 in pink. (C) Violin plots of selected genes among goblet cells in Control WHO 0; Control WHO 7–8; COVID-19 convalescent patients; COVID-19 WHO 1–5 and COVID-19 WHO 6–8. Eicosanoid precursors demarcate patients with more severe COVID-19 disease from those with less severe disease   To understand better why SPMs synthesizing gene expression is increased COVID-19 patients with high WHO score we utilize a subset of 20 individuals from the previous cohort for which we had peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) samples as described in the  methods  section. Using this cohort, we tried to understand how circulating lipid metabolites are modulated in SARS-CoV-2 infection. We compared the lipid profiles of healthy controls with hospitalized patients with SARS-CoV-2. Using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to visualize the overall variance in our dataset, we did not observe any difference in clustering of samples between healthy controls and those with SARS-CoV-2 ( Supplemental Figure 1 ). A row normalized heatmap was used to visualize the 31 lipid metabolites measured ( Fig. 2A ). Univariate comparison of lipid metabolites using Mann-Whitney U-test revealed that 6 lipid metabolites were significantly (p≤0.05) increased in SARS-CoV-2 patients compared to healthy controls (red asterisks in  Fig. 2A ). These include the inflammatory mediators Arachidonic Acid (AA) and Eicosapentaenoic Acid (EPA) which are known to give rise to eicosanoids and may serve as drivers of systemic inflammation seen in SARS-CoV-2. Further inspection of the heatmap reveals that there are two potential clusters of SARS-CoV-2 patients, one exhibiting general elevated levels of lipid mediators (boxed in black) compared to another cluster with low expression of lipids even compared to controls. Of interest, those with higher levels of lipids have higher WHO score. PCA analysis of just the SARS-CoV-2 infected samples confirms those with a WHO score <5 separate on PC1 and PC2 from those with a WHO Score >5 ( Fig. 2B ). To explore this heterogeneity in lipid profiles between those with more severe disease scores, we again performed univariate analysis between the two groups using Mann-Whitney U-tests ( Fig. 2C ). We identify that some lipid metabolites identified as heightened in SARS-CoV-2 (AA, Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), Docosapentaenoic acid (DPA), and Docosatetraenoic acid) are also increased significantly in patient samples with more severe SARS-CoV-2 disease. Notably, additional inflammatory lipids including Eicosatrienoic acid and Eicosadienoic acid (metabolites leading to AA and Eicosanoids) and Stearic acid were also significantly elevated in samples from patients with more severe disease. These data highlight that individuals with inflammatory lipid profiles are more likely to have a more severe disease score. To confirm this, we performed spearman correlations of lipid metabolites with WHO score ( Fig. 2D ). Consistent with our prior findings, key inflammatory lipids including AA (rho=0.742, p=0.018) and EPA (rho=0.736, p=0.019) along with the fatty acids DHA (rho=0.736, p=0.019) and DPA (rho=0.699, p=0.029) were significant positive correlates of WHO disease severity score. Lineolic acid (rho=0.0644, p=0.05) and its related metabolites (a-linoleic acid [rho=0.663, p=0.042] and Dihomo-y-linolenic acid [0.657, p=0.045]) which are precursors for Eicosanoids were also identified as positive correlates of disease severity. Combined, these data clearly illuminate that individuals with heightened circulating lipids involved in inflammatory responses through the generation of eicosanoids have more severe disease providing a direct link between inflammatory lipids and the spread of inflammatory disease during SARS-CoV-2.   Figure 2: Arachidonic acid and eicosanoid metabolites are significantly increased in COVID-19 and correlated with disease severity.     Open in a new tab   (A) Row normalized heatmap of lipidomic expression profiles comparing hospitalized individuals with COVID-19 (n=10) and health controls (n=10). *=p<0.05 by Mann-Whitney U-test. (B) PCA analysis showing that participants with a high disease severity (WHO Score >5) separate from those with low disease severity (WHO Score <5). (C) Row normalized heatmap visually confirms distinct metabolic profiles associated with heightened disease severity. *=p<0.05 by Mann-Whitney U-test. (D) Network visual of Spearman correlations of lipid metabolites with WHO Score, identifying arachidonic acid and eicosanoid metabolites as key lipid biomarkers of disease severity. Color of line=rho; Thickness of line= negative log10 of p-value Pathways of cell cycle progression, DNA damage and innate immune function are differentially modulated transcriptionally between patients with high and low WHO disease scores   Having established a unique lipid profile exists between patients with high vs. low WHO disease score, we next wanted to investigate how transcriptional responses are differentially modulated between these two groups. Using normalized read counts from each sample, we first performed an unsupervised analysis of variance of the data using PCA. Using this analysis, we observe two main clusters of samples with one comprised of 3/5 patients with low WHO score and the other with 3/4 patients with high WHO score ( Fig. 3A ). A heatmap plotting the top 100 DEGs confirms that there are distinct transcriptional profiles between patients with low and high WHO disease score severity ( Fig. 3B ). Using unbiased clustering by Euclidian distance, we observe that the two groups of patients separate on this heatmap providing clear evidence that these groups have distinct transcriptional profiles. The genes which were significantly induced and reduced (adjusted p≤0.05) in the WHO high score patients are represented in separate network models ( Supplemental Fig. 2A , B ). To better understand the biology underlying these differences in transcriptional responses, we performed pathway enrichment analysis on genes which were significantly (p<0.05) modulated between the two groups using the ClueGO app in Cytoscape and pathways from the Gene Ontology, KEGG and Reactome datasets. Separate analyses were performed for genes significantly induced in high WHO score and genes significantly reduced in high WHO score. Our analysis revealed no immune pathways which were significantly (p≤0.05) enriched for genes which were induced in WHO high score patients ( Supp. Fig. 2C ) though protein trafficking and response to hypoxia, likely due to pathologically low levels of O2 saturation, were increased in high disease severity. We identified several key pathways and nodes which were enriched for genes which were significantly reduced in WHO score high patients. These include pathways related to innate immunity, interactions between lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells, Interleukin signaling, and RHO GTPase function ( Fig. 3C ). Although inflammation and innate immune activation are a hallmark of severe COVID-19 disease, these data suggest the potential that within those who have severe disease there is impaired innate immune function in those with the most severe disease and that this may be a contributing factor to their poor disease outcomes. Pathways induced in WHO high score were related to Golgi-ER trafficking, protein SUMOylation, and cellular response to hypoxia, likely reflective of reduced respiratory function and blood oxygen levels seen with increasing disease severity ( Supplementary Fig. 2C ). We next correlated gene expression with WHO score across the entire cohort of 10 patients with sequencing and performed pathway enrichment analysis using ClueGO as before. Genes which are significant and positive correlates of WHO score (adjusted p≤0.10) were enriched in pathways of cell cycling (G1/S checkpoints, G2/M transition) and homologous recombination in response to DNA damage indicating those with high disease score undergo augmented cell cycling and DNA damage ( Fig. 4A ). This is consistent with a previous report demonstrating that cell cycle dysregulations are common changes in severe COVID-19, suggesting an association with disease severity ( 38 ). We also observed an increase in pathways of the unfolded protein response and protein targeting to the ER suggesting heightened ER stress in these patients which may also contribute to inflammation and pathology. When we look at pathways enriched for genes which significantly and negatively correlate with WHO score reduced genes (adjusted p≤0.10), we identify pathways and nodes associated to IL-1 and inflammasome function as well as IFN signaling ( Fig. 4B ). If we perform pathway analysis on genes which correlate with a rho>0.80 or <−0.80 and adjusted p≤0.15 we again see significant enrichment in pathways of cell cycling among positively correlating genes and pathways of innate immunity as enriched for negatively correlating genes ( Supplemental Fig. 3A – 3B ). These findings support an association between lower innate immune activation (seen in  Fig. 3C ) in those with high WHO disease score and further highlight that there may be critical differences in the regulation of innate immune function between SARS-CoV-2 infected patients with a high vs a low WHO disease severity score. Further investigation of these differences could be critical for understanding how to treat patients who present with more severe COVID-19 disease.   Figure 3: High disease severity in COVID-19 is associated with reduced expression of genes in pathways of innate immunity and cytokine signaling.     Open in a new tab   RNA-sequencing was performed on n=9 participants with COVID-19. (A) PCA analysis reveals that the transcriptional profile of 4 of 5 individuals with high WHO disease severity separate from the transcriptional profile of those with low WHO disease severity. (B) Row normalized heatmap of top 100 differentially expressed genes showing clear differential expression of these genes between the low and high WHO disease severity groups. (C) Network-based pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs (adjusted p<0.05) between low and high disease severity score groups using ClueGO in Cytoscape. Genes with reduced expression in high disease severity are significantly (p<0.05 by Fisher’s exact-test) enriched in pathways of innate immunity, cytokine signaling, immune cell interaction, GTPase function and lipid metabolism. Figure 4: Pathways of cell cycling and DNA damage correlate positively