>Materials and Methods   Study Characteristics   The Ausimmune Study (2003–2007)   This was a multicenter incident matched case–control study across 4 regions of eastern Australia: Brisbane City, Queensland, Newcastle City and surrounds, New South Wales, Geelong and Western Districts of Victoria, Victoria, and the state of Tasmania.   18    Cases (91% response rate) were recruited soon after FCD (median time interval = 148, interquartile range = 78 to 200 days).   27    Controls (60% response rate of those contacted) were randomly selected from the compulsory Australian Electoral Roll, matched to cases by age (± 2 years), sex, and study region.   27       Here, we restricted to FCD cases (n = 206) who did not have a non‐MS diagnosis by the 10‐year follow‐up. Of these, 93% (n = 192) had a recorded clinical or radiological evidence substantiating a clinically definite MS (CDMS) diagnosis (in keeping with 2010 McDonald criteria   28   ) and 7% (n = 14) were lost to follow‐up. We utilized matched controls (n = 348) with DNAm data available. FCD cases were classified by neurologist review at study entry as: “first demyelinating event (FDE)” with no prior undiagnosed episodes of suspected demyelination (n = 107), FCD with suspected prior undiagnosed episodes (n = 84), and progressive‐onset cases (n = 15). Ausimmune was approved by 9 regional human research ethics committees and all participants provided written informed consent.   At their study clinic, participants completed comprehensive surveys querying a number of environmental and other factors over the life course,   18    including self‐reported history of IM (as well as the age periods at which this occurred), and a life calendar‐based assessment of summer and winter sun exposures, from which seasonal sun exposure frequencies in the 3 years prior to the study were derived (dichotomized at ≥ 2 hours/day). Sociodemographic factors, diet, smoking, and supplement use were also recorded. Medication use, including disease‐modifying therapies (DMTs), was also recorded.   18   ,    29    At this study clinic, biospecimens were collected from each participant using phlebotomy. From these, serum 25(OH)D concentrations were measured using liquid chromatography tandem mass‐spectrometry   27    and seasonally adjusted,   30    and serum anti‐EBNA IgG titers were measured using immunofluorescence assay (dichotomized at ≥ 640).   29    DNA was extracted from whole‐blood using QIAamp DNA Blood Mini kit (Qiagen, The Netherlands). Genotyping was conducted by the Global Screening Array version 2.1 (Illumina, USA). DNAm was measured using the Illumina Infinium Human Methylation EPIC BeadChip Kit (Illumina, USA) and processed as described previously, resulting in 742,961 CpGs included for analysis.   22     Epidemiological Investigation of Multiple Sclerosis (2005‐2011)   This was a Swedish MS case–control study, matched on age, sex, and ethnicity.   6    Controls were selected from a national Swedish population register.   6    EIMS response rates for cases and controls were 93% and 70%, respectively.   6    The smaller participant sample used for EIMS DNAm analyses (n = 140 cases and 139 controls) were matched on age, sex, ethnicity (all Swedish), and smoking status (never/ex‐smoker/current). Cases were diagnosed according to the 2010 McDonald criteria.   28    EIMS was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board at Karolinska Institutet, and all participants provided written informed consent.   At the EIMS study clinic, participants were queried for a range of environmental factors, including IM history and sun exposure behaviors using standardized questionnaires.   6    Sun exposure in the 5 years prior to the date of interview was based on a composite score from 3 questions: (1) frequency of sunbathing, (2) frequency of recent travel to a sunnier country than Sweden, and (3) frequency of use of sunbeds, estimating a total score ranging between 3 and 12 and dichotomized at > 6.   6    Medication use, including DMTs, was recorded. At this same clinic, biospecimens were collected from each participant using phlebotomy, from which serum anti‐EBNA EBIgG (EBV‐EBNA‐peptide segment, aa385‐420) was measured using multiplex serological assay   31   ,    32    (dichotomized at median = 6716) and serum 25(OH)D estimated using chemiluminescent immunoassay (Diasorin).   33       HLA genotypes were measured using the Illumina exome chip (Illumina, USA), supplemented by HLA*IMP:02 imputation.   34    DNAm was measured using the Illumina 450 K array (Illumina, USA), and 478,687 CpGs were included for analysis.   22    This DNAm dataset is available on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database ( GSE43976  and  GSE106648 ). Statistical Methods   The series of analytical steps are summarized in Figure  1 . Analyses were conducted in R software (version 4.3.2). Further details on the 5 main components are outlined below. All analyses were complete case.   FIGURE 1.     Open in a new tab   Visual summary and outline of analytical steps used in the project analyses. Analysis of the 2 study datasets included here (Ausimmune and EIMS) were limited in each to those participants with DNAm data, and in Ausimmune also to those cases who converted to MS by 10‐year follow‐up and their associated controls. (1) Analyzed exposure associations with MS risk in each study dataset, including individual and joint (additive and multiplicative interaction effects. (2) Derived DNAm modules utilizing DNAm data from each study and dimension‐reduction applied to each. (3) Evaluated DNAm associations with MS risk and with exposures, to determine those suitable for use as mediators. (4) Evaluated DNAm modules as mediators of exposure‐MS risk associations. (5) Determined the characteristics of DNAm modules using sub‐network enrichment and transcription factor analyses. DNAm = DNA methylation; EIMS = Epidemiologic Investigations of Multiple Sclerosis; MS = multiple sclerosis. [Color figure can be viewed at  www.annalsofneurology.org ] Exposure‐outcome associations were assessed by multivariable logistic regression, adjusted for matching factors (Ausimmune = age, sex, and region and EIMS = age, sex, ethnicity, and smoking status). Because smoking was a matching criterion in the EIMS DNAm substudy, it could not be examined as a risk factor here.   Interactions   We examined additive and multiplicative interactions between each of IM, anti‐EBNA IgG titer, vitamin D, and sun exposure and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  in their associations with MS case status in Ausimmune.   35   ,    36    Categorical terms from dichotomized exposures were used to assess additive interaction between EBV indices (IM history and anti‐EBNA IgG titer) and low vitamin D or low sun, as well as between EBV indices and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  genotype. Relative excess risk due to interaction (RERI) and attributable proportion due to interaction (AP) statistics were estimated. Assessment of statistical trends (p trend ) was done by evaluating ordered polychotomous terms and reporting the  p  value from these terms. Network‐Level Investigations   These analyses had a focus on system‐level epigenomics.   25   ,    37    We constructed DNAm modules, which are MS‐associated networks of CpGs formed by well‐known clustering algorithms. We then assessed the biological characteristics of each module by pathway enrichment analysis and the inference of upstream transcription factors. Such functionally connected modules were then examined in relation to both MS and risk factors and tested using counterfactual mediation analysis.   38    We then assessed system‐level replication of our results based on the consistencies of the enriched pathways across the studies. DNAm Module Construction in Ausimmune   To ensure MS‐specific DNAm results, we first ranked CpGs by association with MS onset risk in an epigenome‐wide association study (EWAS) using a cross‐package Bioconductor workflow.   39    An adjustment was made for cell type proportion using the EpiDish R package,   40    ancestry (first 2 principal components),   22    and study matching covariates. The top‐ranked CpGs (n = 2,432, Benjamini‐Hochberg adjusted  p  value,   41    p adjusted  < 5 × 10 −6 ) were retained as inputs for Weighted Gene Correlation Network Analysis (WGCNA),   42    which produced a set of modules containing biologically related CpGs (Supplementary Fig  S1 ). Standard settings for the WGCNA package in R software were used: unsigned network, minModulesize = 30, reassignment threshold = 0.05, and mergecutHeight = 0.25. Scale independence and mean connectivity assessment indicated a soft power threshold of 7 was optimal (Supplementary Fig  S2 ). Each module is represented by its first principal component in further analyses. DNAm Module Construction in EIMS   Because the EIMS analysis sample was smaller in number and DNAm was profiled using the Illumina 450 K array (providing only 64% as many CpGs as the EPIC 850 K array used in Ausimmune), we used sparse Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (sPLS‐DA),   43    a fully supervised machine‐learning approach better powered to derive MS‐associated DNAm modules in sparser data like that used in EIMS. The sPLS‐DA model was trained with a 75%/25% train/test split. Parameter tuning indicated the optimal model would include 3 components containing 1,000, 400, and 200 CpGs, respectively. After training, the components’ analysis indicated good discrimination between cases and controls. Evaluations of DNAm Modules' Associations With MS Onset and With Risk Factors   We identified DNAm modules significantly associated with MS risk. Within each study, DNAm modules were ranked by the statistical significance of their associations with MS risk, ranging A1‐ to A5‐modules in Ausimmune and E1‐ and E2‐module in EIMS. We then evaluated the key risk factors, including EBV indices (IM history and anti‐EBNA IgG titer), lower serum 25(OH)D, low sun exposure, and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  with these DNAm modules. We conducted a control‐only assessment of risk factors and DNAm modules in the larger Ausimmune Study. The smaller EIMS study (139 controls) was not suitable for this, particularly after risk stratification by  HLA‐DRB1*1501  genotype. Mediation Analyses of Exposure‐MS Associations and of MS‐Exposure Associations by DNAm Modules   DNAm modules were evaluated as mediators of exposure‐MS associations by counterfactual mediation analysis ( medflex  R package).   38    This gave estimations of total (exposure‐outcome), direct (exposure‐to‐outcome independent of DNAm module), and indirect (exposure‐to‐outcome via DNA module) effects, as well as their statistical significances. We also report the proportion of total effect in exposure‐MS associations acting via the DNAm module as the proportion mediated (indirect/total effect ratio, as percent).   To support temporal ordering of the exposure‐mediator outcome measures here, as required for mediation analysis,   19    we undertook the following analyses. We examined the extent that the time interval between FCD and interview was related to the measures, an approach we have used previously.   27    We restricted to FDEs with no history of suspected demyelination (Supplementary Table  S6 ). We tested whether the A1 and A2 DNAm modules were enriched for MS disease risk genes using genome‐wide association study (GWAS) metadata from the GWAS Catalog ( https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/ ). We assessed whether reverse‐pathway mediation analyses (case status to mediator to exposure) showed comparable magnitude and significance of mediation as seen in the primary (exposure to mediator to outcome) mediation analyses. As  HLA‐DRB1*1501  is determined at conception, this was not assessed for potential reverse causation. In addition, to account for potential selection bias between those with and without DNAm data in Ausimmune, we undertook inverse probability weighting (IPW) methods, accounting for age, sex, region, education, and ancestry. Additional analyses included limiting EIMS analyses to those cases diagnosed in the preceding 5 years (n = 58), and, in both studies, analyses were done limiting to cases not on DMTs at the time of study (Ausimmune n = 163 and EIMS n = 52). Using Gene Enrichment Analysis to Understand DNAm Module Functional Relevance   For each of the 4 DNAm modules found to be mediators of risk factor‐MS onset associations in Ausimmune and EIMS, the CpGs were mapped to their nearest gene and the gene‐set of each module was ordered by  p  values of correlations with their module. Each gene‐set was run through the pathfindR algorithm in R software, which performs active sub‐network enrichment analysis, with Reactome and Gene Ontology as reference pathway databases with Benjamini‐Hochberg adjustment for multiple comparisons. We assessed these results (i) for each module individually, and (ii) for the pathways that overlap with the Ausimmune modules’ results (given their enhanced biological information). To determine whether epigenetic factors had shared biological processes across the 2 studies, we used the hypergeometric test to calculate a fold enrichment and  p  value for the sets of pathways overlapping between these factors.   44     Upstream Transcription Factors and DNAm Modules   We used the Lisa platform   45    to infer the upstream regulators of the Ausimmune DNAm modules in silico, selecting the top 20 transcription factors (TFs) for each for further investigation. Using the Open Targets platform,   46    we cross‐referenced each TF for association with MS, key MS treatments, and biological elements related to key MS‐associated transcription factors. Reporting   We have ensured our analyses align with the STROBE   47    reporting guidelines. Results   Study Characteristics   The Ausimmune analyses compared 206 FCD cases who had predominantly converted to MS by the 10‐year follow‐up with 348 matched controls (Supplementary Table  S1 ). The sample was 78% female subjects with a mean age 39.6 years. A minority of cases (20.9%) were using DMTs. Vitamin D supplement use was infrequent in this sample (1.8% of cases and 0.6% of controls). There were no material differences in the characteristics of cases or controls used in this project from those in the initial study ( p  ≥ 0.09). The time interval between FCD and interview did not relate to anti‐EBNA IgG titer and serum 25(OH)D (< 50 nmol/L).   27       The EIMS sample with DNAm data was a matched subsample of the larger EIMS study (n = 140 MS cases and n = 139 matched controls) was 72.5% female subjects, with a mean age of 34.6 years. Two‐thirds of the cases were using DMTs at the time of blood sampling. Other study characteristics are shown in Supplementary Table  S2 .  EBV Indices, Lower Vitamin D, Low Sun Exposure, and   HLA‐DRB1*1501  Were Individually and Jointly Associated With MS Risk in Ausimmune and EIMS    Consistent with prior work,   27   ,    29   ,    48    IM history, anti‐EBNA IgG titer, lower seasonally adjusted serum 25(OH)D (< 50 nmol/L), low pre‐onset sun exposure, and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  were each associated with MS risk in the Ausimmune study (see Supplementary Table  S1 ). Similarly, in the EIMS analysis subset, high anti‐EBNA IgG titer, low sun exposure, and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  were associated with MS risk (see Supplementary Table  S2 ), in keeping with previously published results.   6   ,    31       In both the Ausimmune and EIMS studies, we have previously reported interactions between  HLA‐DRB1*1501  and anti‐EBNA IgG titer.   31   ,    48    A recent meta‐analysis that included these studies demonstrated a supra‐additive interaction between these 2 factors (Fig  2A ).   7    Recently, Hedström et al reported positive additive patterns between anti‐EBV‐EBNA IgG titer and low sun exposure in EIMS.   6    Using the Ausimmune data, we evaluated additive interactions between EBV indices and vitamin D/sun exposure. We found a significant positive additive interaction between anti‐EBNA IgG titer and both summer and winter sun exposure, those with both risk factors having a nearly 4‐fold greater MS risk compared to those with neither factor (Supplementary Table  S3 ). Similar effects were observed using low seasonally adjusted serum 25(OH)D instead of low sun exposure, and IM history instead of anti‐EBNA IgG titer. Interaction was also evident on the multiplicative scale with lower 25(OH)D levels potentiating the adverse effects of EBV; in both studies, a doubling of anti‐EBNA IgG titer and lower serum 25(OH)D levels were found (Ausimmune:  p  = 0.022 and EIMS:  p  = 1.44 × 10 −8 ; see Supplementary Fig  S3 ).   FIGURE 2.     Open in a new tab   Elevated EBNA levels and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  risk variant operate through common epigenetic DNAm modules to drive, in part, synergistic gene–environment interaction. (A) Synergistic interaction between anti‐EBNA IgG (EBNA) and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  is evident in the meta‐analysis by Jacobs et al,   7    which reported measures of interaction as follows: AP = 0.48 (95% CI = 0.26–0.71) and relative excess risk due to interaction (RERI) = 3.84 (95% CI: 1.19–6.49). EBNA lo and EBNA hi denote dichotomized anti‐EBNA IgG, dichotomized as top quartile (titer = 640 or 2,560) versus lower quartiles. HLA– and HLA+ represent  HLA‐DRB1*1501  genotype (rs3135388) as AA/AG vs GG (risk). (B–E) mediation results demonstrate significant indirect effects for both anti‐EBNA IgG and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  across both studies. In Ausimmune EBNA = anti‐EBNA IgG titer (top quartile is 640 and 2,560 titers vs rest) and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  =  HLA‐DRB1*1501  risk variant (rs3135388) is AA/AG versus GG (risk). In EIMS EBNA = anti‐EBNA IgG peptide, dichotomized at median (6,716) and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  =  HLA‐DRB1*1501  risk variant (rs3135388) is AA/AG versus GG (risk). AP = attributable proportion; 95% CI = 95% confidence interval; DNAm = DNA methylation; EBNA = Epstein Barr Nuclear Antigen; EIMS = Epidemiologic Investigations of Multiple Sclerosis; RERI = relative excess risk due to interaction. [Color figure can be viewed at  www.annalsofneurology.org ] Having now established the shared key risk factors and joint effects in these studies, we evaluated DNAm modules and related mediation using Ausimmune as the principal study and replication in the EIMS data, where possible.  DNAm Modules Were Associated With Both MS Risk and with Key Risk Factors in Both Studies   In the Ausimmune study, all 5 of the DNAm modules were significantly associated with MS risk, whereas in the EIMS study, only the first 2 components were significantly associated with MS (all  p  < 0.001; Supplementary Table  S4 ). The time interval between FCD and interview was not associated with any of the 5 modules in the Ausimmune study. These associations persisted in sensitivity analyses restricted to FDE cases in Ausimmune, as well as excluding all DMT‐treated cases in Ausimmune and EIMS.   Evaluating MS risk‐associated DNAm modules’ associations with the key exposures in each study, including higher anti‐EBNA IgG titer, lower serum 25(OH)D levels, and  HLA‐DRB1*1501  (Fig  3  and Supplementary Table  S5 ), only the A1 and A2 modules in Ausimmune were consistently associated with EBV indices or sun/vitamin D parameters. Therefore, these 2 top ranked modules were examined further but A3 to A5 were not.   FIGURE 3.     Open in a new tab   Key risk factors are associated with DNAm modules: the Ausimmune and EIMS studies. The compositions of these DNAm modules are described in the text. In the Ausimmune study, EBNA IgG titer = anti‐EBNA IgG titer (top quartile is 640 and 2,560 titers vs rest). In the EIMS study, EBNA IgG peptide = anti‐EBNA IgG peptide, dichotomized at median (6716). In both the Ausimmune and EIMS studies (cases and controls), lower 25(OH)D is continuous deseasonalized 25‐hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D), reversed to be in consistent positive association as other covariates in figure, expressed in units of 10 nmol/L. In Ausimmune, low summer sun was defined from self‐reported sun exposure less than 2 hours/day in summer or winter in 3 years preceding FCD. Low sun exposure in EIMS was defined from responses to 3 self‐reported questions regarding sun exposure (frequency of sunbathing, frequency of recent travel to a sunnier country than Sweden, and frequency of use of sunbeds), estimating a composite score ranging from 3 to 12, here, dichotomized and low sun exposure defined as sun score ≤ 6. In both the Ausimmune and EIMS studies