>Methods   Transcriptomic expression and clinical data   The transcriptomic expression profiles of ESCC patients in the TCGA-ESCA cohort (The Cancer Genome Atlas-Esophageal Carcinoma, N = 182) were obtained from the cBioPortal ( https://www.cbioportal.org/ ). Clinical information, including age, sex, clinical stage, TNM stage, and survival time, was also retrieved. Patients categorized as EAC type, of unknown type, or without survival data were omitted. This filtering resulted in 90 patients being selected for our study. cBioPortal preprocessed these data, including quality control, data cleaning, standardization, to ensure the accuracy and comparability of the data. During RNA-Seq processes in ESCC tissues or the conversion of raw data to RSEM format in cBioPortal, certain genes or transcripts may have incomplete or unavailable sequencing data due to technological limitations. The missing values of the RNA-seq data were imputed by using the knnimputation function of the R package ‘DMwR2’ (v.0.0.2).   The other two ESCC datasets ( GSE53625 , N = 358 and  GSE121931 , N = 125) were procured from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ ). The  GSE53625  dataset was utilized for exploratory analysis because it met our criteria: (1) contained human esophageal tissue samples, (2) contained at least 100 samples, (3) provided gene symbol annotations, and (4) had prognostic information. This cohort, consisting of 179 ESCC samples, was the most extensive dataset in our study, establishing it as the primary dataset for discovery and analyses. The  GSE121931  dataset was another GEO dataset comprising 125 patients, specifically chosen to validate our metabolic pathway stratification. The raw data of the two GEO datasets were processed by the robust multiarray averaging (RMA) algorithm with ‘affy’ package and the duplicate probes were merged via median number. Metabolic pathway-based classification   To investigate the metabolic heterogeneity in ESCC, we manually selected 82 metabolic pathways (Table  S1 ) from the Reactome Pathway Database ( https://reactome.org/ ). We used gene set variation analysis (GSVA) with the R package 'GSVA' (v.1.42.0) to calculate the enrichment scores of metabolic pathways in each sample. The relevance of the pathways was explored with Pearson correlation. To investigate the metabolic heterogeneity within the ESCC tumors, the unsupervised clustering nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) method was utilized for consensus clustering of metabolic pathway-based clusters (MPCs). The R packages ‘NMF’ (v.0.23.0) and ‘doMPI’ (v.0.2.2) with the Lee algorithm were adopted to stratify the samples. The optimal number of clusters was determined according to cophenetics, consensus matrices and silhouette coefficients. The most suitable rank value was determined by identifying the point where the cophenetic value exhibited the most significant change in response to variations in the cluster count. To enhance the validity of our judgments, we employed supplementary tools such as heatmaps. These visual aids provided a clear snapshot of the data, enabling a more precise evaluation. 84 metabolic pathways extracted from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database ( http://www.kegg.jp/ ) were used to validate cluster characteristics (Table  S2 ). PPI network analysis of the integrated DEGs   We identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to metabolism by pairwise comparisons of clusters using the 'limma' R package (v.3.50.3) and considered the union set of these comparison results as the DEGs among the three MPCs 18 . The metabolic-related DEGs were further filtered by intersection with DEGs between tumor and normal tissues. The normalized gene expression data were subsequently analyzed with the lmFit and eBayes functions to calculate expression statistics. The significance criterion for DEGs was a  false discovery rate  ( FDR ) less than 0.001.   The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins database (STRING,  https://string-db.org/ ) was used to investigate and visualize the gene interactions. The DEGs obtained above were submitted to the STRING database to determine their protein‒protein interactions (PPIs). We imported the PPIs into Cytoscape software (v.3.9.0) to construct a network and exclude nodes without betweenness. The PPI network ultimately contained 174 filtered DEGs (Table  S3 ). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was used to explore the potential biological processes, cell compositions and molecular functions of the filtered DEGs with the R package ‘clusterProfiler’ (v.4.2.2) 19 . Genomic mutations and mutational signature analysis   Mutation and copy number alteration (CNA) data in mutation annotation format (MAF) from the TCGA cohort were also obtained from the cBioPortal. Mutational landscape depiction and signature extraction were both applied in the ‘maftools’ package. The ExtractSignatures function based on Bayesian variant nonnegative matrix factorization factorizes the mutation portrait matrix into two nonnegative matrices, ‘signatures’ and ‘contributions’, where ‘signatures’ represent mutational processes and ‘contributions’ represent the corresponding mutational activities 20 . The SignatureEnrichment function automatically determines the optimal number of extracted mutational signatures and assigns them to each sample based on mutational activity. The extracted mutational portraits of CRC were compared and annotated by cosine similarity analysis against the Catalog of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database. Immune cell infiltration analysis   CIBERSORT ( http://cibersort.stanford.edu/ ), a deconvolution algorithm based on transcriptome data, was used to estimate the composition and abundance of immune cells in complex tissues. The method provided a known dataset of gene expression features for 22 immune cell subsets downloaded from the study by Ali et al. 21 . xCell ( https://xcell.ucsf.edu/ ) is another computational method based on single-sample GSEA (ssGSEA). The method transforms gene expression profiles into enriched fractions of 64 immune and stromal cell types across samples. The relative abundance of each immune cell type was represented by an enrichment score. The two methods were combined to explore differences in immune infiltration among MPCs.   We also used the R package ‘IOBR’ (v.0.99.9) 22  to analyze the whole landscape of immune cell signatures. The package integrates eight published methods for quantifying the percentage of signatures and gathers the results for all methods. The ssGSEA method was also used for our analysis. In addition to analyzing immune signatures, this package is equipped to analyze the tumor environment, m6A status, metabolism, exosomes, and microsatellite instability (MSI) status, providing a comprehensive overview of the results. Functional enrichment analysis   The GSVA method was also used to explore the biological pathways extracted from the RNA-seq data. The Hallmark gene sets, which represent clearly defined biological states and processes, were obtained from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB,  http://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/collections.jsp ). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was also applied to identify the gene sets that were significantly enriched among the MPCs. The R package ‘limma’ 18  was used to evaluate the differential expression of more than 20,000 genes in samples from different groups. Genes sorted according to logFC values produced by limma were used as inputs for GSEA with the R package ‘clusterProfiler’ (v.4.2.2) 19  against the KEGG pathways; these data were also downloaded from the MSigDB as reference gene sets. Metabolite profile analysis   We utilized cell lines to explore the relative levels of metabolites in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database. The metabolome landscape of esophageal cancer cell lines was collected from Li et al. study 23 . We selected 27 esophageal cancer cell lines with ESCC annotations. The transcriptome data were downloaded from the Dependency Map (DepMap) portal. The cell lines were stratified by the NMF algorithm using the same analysis pipelines used in this study. A total of 225 metabolites profiled by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) were retained in 26 available cell lines. Finally, we compared the metabolite levels among the three MPCs. Drug sensitivity analysis   We used the R package ‘oncoPredict’ (v.0.2) 24  to construct the drug sensitivity prediction procedure. The imputations were performed based on the expression matrix of a training set with known drug treatment information against the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) database. The phenotypes (drug sensitivity scores) of the samples were calculated using ridge regression with bulk RNA-seq data. Immunotherapy cohort analysis   An immunotherapeutic cohort of patients with advanced squamous cancer 25  treated with atezolizumab (anti-PD-L1 mAb) was utilized to further explore the immunotherapeutic outcomes based on our NMF classification method. The transcriptome profiles and detailed clinical annotations with immune response information were downloaded from the R package ‘IMvigor210CoreBiologies’ (v.1.0.0), with 295 patients enrolled in our analysis. We acquired enrichment scores based on metabolic pathway enrichment via the GSVA method. The samples were also classified as MPCs by NMF using the Lee algorithm based on enrichment scores. Given the association between tumor neoantigen burden and immunotherapy efficacy, we retained a total of 214 samples that contained neoantigen burden information to probe differences among the clusters. Each MPC subtype was subsequently segmented into high- and low- neoantigen burden groups based on the median count and labeled HMPC or LMPC, respectively. Statistical analysis   Statistical analysis was performed using R software (v.4.1.3). For normally distributed variables, Student’s t test and one-way ANOVA were separately used to perform the group comparisons of two groups and more than two groups, respectively. Otherwise, the Wilcoxon rank-sum test or Kruskal‒Wallis test was used as a nonparametric test. The χ 2  test or Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze categorical variables. K‒M survival analysis and a Cox proportional hazards model were used to analyze the association between the MPCs and patient prognosis with the R packages ‘survival’ (v. 3.2.13) and ‘survminer’ (v.0.4.9). Cox multivariate regression was performed with the R package ‘ezcox’ (v.1.0.2). Unless otherwise mentioned,  P  < 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. Results   Three distinct MPCs in ESCC tissues based on NMF analysis   Previous studies have demonstrated heterogeneity in metabolic gene expression within tumors and across different cancer types 26 . In this study, we aimed to investigate this heterogeneity using transcriptomic data. The overall workflow of the metabolic stratification is shown in Fig.  1 A. Correlation analysis of the 82 pathway enrichment scores identified clusters of pathways that were either coactivated or corepressed across the dataset (Fig.  S1 A). The gene set enrichment scores of the extracted metabolic pathways were calculated with the GSVA algorithm for each sample. After conducting an NMF rank survey analysis with group numbers K ranging from two to seven, we determined that the optimal clustering number was three. The consensus matrices of different ranks in the three datasets and the mixture coefficients of rank three are illustrated in the heatmap (Fig.  S1 B–E). This determination arose from the significant decrease in the cophenetic correlation coefficient observed when the clustering number was set to three. This dip indicated a more distinct and meaningful clustering pattern compared to other values of K, thus suggesting that three clusters best represented the underlying structure in the data (Fig.  S2 ). Additional NMF rank survey indices supported our classification approach. The silhouette analysis further confirmed the appropriateness of our clustering configuration by revealing a high value for the objects assigned to cluster three. We integrated the distinct pathways from the two exploration datasets ( GSE53625  and TCGA) to characterize the metabolic profiles of the different MPCs (labeled MPC1, MPC2, and MPC3), and verified the characteristic identification using the validation dataset ( GSE121931 ). Overall, the relative scores of metabolic pathways among the MPCs exhibited unique patterns (Figs.  1 B,  S3 A). MPC1 can be classified as a lipid type and includes glycosphingolipid, heparin, triglyceride and linoleic acid. MPC2 was characterized by the upregulation of amino acid metabolism, especially that of selenoamino acids. MPC3 was identified as an energy metabolism cluster that upregulates glucose metabolism and nucleotide metabolism, with concurrent upregulation of vitamin and cofactor metabolism. To further validate the metabolic profiles of our clusters, we reanalyzed the enrichment score among clusters using the KEGG database, and found that the metabolic pathways with statistically significant differences of MPCs were consistent with the results via Reactome database (Fig.  S3 B).   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Metabolic pathway-based clustering results and identification of genes differentially expressed with respect to tumor metabolism in ESCC samples. ( A ) Workflow of metabolic pathway-based stratification. ( B ) Heatmap showing normalized enrichment scores of the three MPCs in the TCGA and  GSE53625  cohorts. The significant metabolic pathway enrichment scores acquired from both datasets are plotted. ( C ) Construction of a protein‒protein interaction (PPI) network with 174 filtered DEGs. The size and color of nodes were associated with betweenness. Annotations in red indicate prognosis-related genes. ( D ) Dot plot presenting the results of Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment analysis of 174 filtered DEGs in the PPI network. The PPI network helps identify significant DEGs associated with tumor metabolism   To explore the impact of metabolic heterogeneity and differences between tumor and normal tissues, we conducted an interaction analysis of DEGs. We identified a total of 2696 DEGs between tumor and normal samples. In addition, 4371 DEGs were found to be related to metabolic pathways and had a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.001. The DEGs mentioned above were all obtained by intersecting data from the  GSE53625  and TCGA cohorts.   We subsequently overlapped the two sets of DEGs, culminating in a consolidated list of 368 genes. After removing isolated nodes and genes with zero betweenness, 174 genes were identified and utilized to construct a protein‒protein interaction (PPI) network (Table  S3 ). E2F1 was the gene with the most pronounced difference in betweenness centrality, highlighting its critical role within the network (Fig.  1 C). Notably, E2F1 exhibited higher expression levels of MPC3 and MPC2 than did MPC1, suggesting its potential role in the metabolic heterogeneity observed among the metabolic pathway clusters. Furthermore, we identified seven genes that showed prognostic significance, namely, BCAR1, HLA-B, PDLIM2, PML, PSMB10, SLC25A44 and TCF3 (Fig.  S3 C). We also analyzed the association between survival and lncRNAs in the  GSE53625  dataset using univariate Cox regression. A total of 162 lncRNAs were significantly associated with overall survival (OS) (Table  S4  and Fig.  S3 D). Additionally, we observed differential expression of two negatively correlated prognostic lncRNAs (LINC01867 and CTBP1-AS) and four positively correlated prognostic lncRNAs (TTTY3, TPM1-AS, LINC01132, and VIM-AS1) among the MPCs (Fig.  S3 E).   To further investigate the biological function of the combined 174 DEGs in the PPI network, we performed GO pathway enrichment analysis. The results suggested that the DEGs were mainly enriched in nucleotide and ubiquitination metabolic processes with changes in DNA replication processes and chromosomal regions (Fig.  1 D), indicating that energy metabolism plays a part in the source of genome instability and is a feature of cancerous cells. Collectively, these results suggested that abnormal gene expression relevant to metabolism in tumors might promote tumor heterogeneity. Comparison of clinical features in patients with MPC   The three MPCs also exhibited different clinical characteristics. These genes were associated with OS in both the TCGA (log-rank test  P  = 0.019) and  GSE53625  (log-rank test  P  = 0.039) cohorts (Fig.  2 A). Notably, patients in the MPC3 exhibited poorer OS than patients in the other two clusters did. The clinical annotations and comprehensive statistical descriptions are shown in Figs.  2 B and  S3 F, respectively. For MPC1, the middle section was the predominant location for cancer cells, whereas the upper part also contributed significantly to MPC2 and MPC3 expression. Univariate Cox regression showed that tumor stage and MPC were significantly different between the two cohorts (Fig.  S3 G). Multivariate Cox regression also revealed that MPC3 predicted a worse survival outcome after adjusting for age, sex, and TNM stage, with MPC1 used as a reference ( P  = 0.01 and 0.03, respectively; Fig.  2 C). Associated with the characteristics of MPCs, tumors with higher rates of energy metabolism dysregulation may be more aggressive than tumors with a high level of lipids and amino acids in ESCC.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Comparison of clinical features across metabolic pathway-based clusters ( A ) K‒M curves of overall survival (OS) in the three clusters. ( B ) Clinical annotations of the MPCs. ( C ) Forest plot of the hazard ratio (HR) determined by multivariate Cox regression after adjusting for age, sex and tumor stage showing the prognostic value of the MPCs. Association of MPCs with tumor genomic alteration profiles   We investigated the somatic mutational profile and compared the mutational frequency among the three MPCs in the TCGA dataset (Fig.  S4 A,B). We found that the base mutations consisted largely of C > A and were associated with transition (Ti) > transversion (Tv) in our patients. The waterfall plot showed that TP53 was the most common mutational gene (accounting for 89%) in ESCC (Fig.  3 A), which was consistent with the findings of previous studies 27 . Among the top 20 mutated genes, ZNF750 was differentially expressed among the three MPCs and had the highest mutation rate in MPC3 (Fisher’s exact test,  P  = 0.048). These findings are consistent with the notion that multifaceted oncogenic regulation of energy metabolism is associated with increased numbers of mutations and has enormous biological significance.   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Mutational landscape among metabolic pathway-based clusters of ESCC. ( A ) Oncoplot depicting the distribution of somatic mutation (SNV/indel) and copy number variation (CNV) events affecting frequently mutated genes in ESCC among the MPCs. ( B ) Annotations of curated mutational signatures across MPCs. ( C ) Somatic interactions of the top mutated genes in the MPCs. * means  P  < 0.05. We further investigated the mutational process in ESCC by extracting mutational signatures. The cophenetic metric indicated that the total mutation profiles matched four mutational signatures and were best matched to COSMIC_13, COSMIC_16, COSMIC_1, and COSMIC_4 from the COSMIC database against cosine similarity (Fig.  S4 C–E). These signatures were annotated as APOBEC cytidine deaminase, drinking, spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine and exposure to tobacco (smoking) mutagens (Fig.  S4 F). Nevertheless, upon conducting mutant signature enrichment analysis across different MPC groups, we observed some inconsistencies. Specifically, COMSIC_16 was exclusively enriched in MPC3, whereas COMSIC_5 (potentially linked to aging, tobacco smoking, or nucleotide excision repair deficiency) was enriched in both MPC1 and MPC2 (Figs.  S4 G,  3 B).   We identified 11, 7, and 8 cooccurring mutated gene pairs in the MPC1, MPC2 and MPC3 (Fig.  3 C). Only one mutually exclusive mutated gene pair (KMT2D and TP53) was found in MPC1. Moreover, ZNF750 mutations cooccured with those of TG and TF in MPC1. Moreover, in MPC3, ZNF750 mutations coincided with mutations in PKHD1L1 and DNAH3 ( P  < 0.01). These findings enabled us to depict the effect of metabolic cluster stratification on genomic variation more comprehensively and to reveal the potentially complex interactions between individual somatic mutations and metabolic heterogeneity. Characterization of the immune landscapes of MPCs in ESCC   We utilized the CIBERSORT algorithm to characterize immune cell infiltration in the normalized expression matrices of the ESCC dataset ( GSE53625  and  GSE121931 ). The proportions of 22 immune cells in ESCC are shown in Fig.  S5 A. The infiltration of seven types of immune cells signifi