>Methods   Spectral Preprocessing and Machine Learning Parameter Selection   Prior to training the CNN and LR models, the data was sorted and labeled. Jupyter notebooks describing these processes along with the model training will be available on our GitHub ( https://github.com/Ohio-State-Allen-Lab/Mass_Spec_Functional_Group_ML ). Data sorting and labeling was completed by identifying the functional groups that each molecule contained; this identification was done by looking at the InChiKeys. Certain segments of the InChiKey correlate with specific functional groups, allowing for the labeling of molecules. This process was tailored for our purposes from another publication. 126  After identifying the presence or absence of individual functional groups, the molecules were then sorted into the more generalized functional group classifications (e.g., alcohol, amine, etc.;  Tables S1 and S2 ). After defining each of the functional groups, the number of available spectra for each functional group identification was determined.  Figure  1  shows the distribution of the functional groups present in the NIST mass spectra.   Figure 1.     Open in a new tab   Distributions of available mass spectra from NIST included in this study. (A) Generalized functional group classifications. (B) Specific functional groups. Aromatics are listed as a specific functional group to help correlate the relative distribution between the generalized models and the functional group-specific ones. All the mass spectra were normalized to their most intense fragment peak to ensure that all the  y  axes were scaled the same way. NIST mass spectra only reports intensities for mass fragments over a certain intensity. For these data to be able to be compared to each other, they all needed to have the same dimensionality. To match up the data, the unreported peaks were filled with a correlated 0 intensity. This was done based on the fact that the non-reported peaks were assumed to be in the noise of the instrument. This is a limitation because the addition of the zeroes, although necessary for the training of the models, does artificially inflate the signal-to-noise ratio of the data. This preprocessing was sufficient to prepare the data for the LR-based models. The CNN-based models required further preprocessing.   For the CNN-based models, the data was plotted. These plots were then used as the input data. All the spectra were saved with the same output parameters, so the resolution of the plots is consistent. However, further analysis of the pixel resolution of the exported plots showed that the plots are fewer pixels wide than there are mass values. This means that each pixel is not defining one mass channel as one would expect; this leads to an artificial reduction in mass resolution, which likely is the source of the lack of success for this approach. We do run into an artificial reduction in the resolution of the mass spectral data. The exported plots are 2D representations of the data and should not be confused with hyperspectral imaging, which would generate 3D data.   For both methodologies, it was necessary to scale the number of spectra that did not contain the model’s functional group of interest. The number of spectra that did contain a given functional group or functional group classification was always outnumbered by the number of spectra that did not contain the given functional group or functional group classification. Because of this, spectra were randomly removed from the negative case in order to even out the classes preventing the models from always predicting the not-present class due to a disparity in the data. This also means that if a molecule had multiple unique functional groups, that spectra would be used in some way for each of the represented functional group models.  Figure  2  shows a histogram demonstrating that the average number of unique functional groups present in molecules from the NIST database is three.   Figure 2.     Open in a new tab   Histogram depicting the number of unique functional groups (duplicate functional groups within a molecule are not counted) present in each molecule from the NIST database. The largest distribution is molecules that contain three unique functional groups. Because the majority of molecules contain multiple functional groups, they can be used to represent the positive case for multiple functional group models. After preprocessing the data, it was separated into training and testing data sets ( Figure S1 ). Once the model was trained, the test data was then used to determine how well the models performed on previously unseen data. The number of withheld test spectra was different for the two different parts of the project. When comparing the CNN- and LR-based approaches, only 10 spectra from each class were withheld. This was limited by computational expenses. The workstation that was utilized to run all the training and analysis was insufficient to run more than 10 test samples at a time. When focusing on using only the LR-based models, 50 test spectra were withheld from each class before training. This allowed for further analysis of the accuracies of the models. After the testing data had been removed, the remaining data was parsed into an 80:20 split of training and internal validation. 19 Supplemental Experimental Data Collection   Mass spectra for multiple compounds were collected for further model analysis on experimental data outside of the NIST dataset. The data was collected from an Agilent 8890 GC coupled with a 5977B MSD. Model Training and Testing   CNN and Inception V3   The architecture for our CNN in this work was a retraining of Inception V3, 26  a computer vision model. Inception V3 was trained on and has attained a greater than 78.1% accuracy on the ImageNet dataset (a large data set of millions of images with thousands of different words or word phrases labeled to them, a common test dataset in the computer vision realm 27 − 29 ). ImageNet is certainly very different than a dataset consisting of 2D representations of mass spectra; however, the process of transfer learning on unrelated datasets has shown success in the literature. 30 − 32  The Inception architecture has been used explicitly in the past for spectral processing applications. 33  Image-processing CNNs have been used in other mass spec studies, for example, in 2019, Tran and colleagues developed DeepNovo-DIA, which utilized intensity vectors to train a model to identify peptides. 34  This history in the literature coupled with this approach’s success with image-based IR data in our prior publication drove our decision to utilize the retraining of Inception V3. 25  These models were trained using a learning rate of 0.1 and training step ranges between 200 and 20,000 steps. Logistic Regression through SciKit Learn   The LR models were developed using SciKit Learn’s logistic regression classifier. In our utilization, we use the newton-cg solver. LR was chosen as our alternative ML approach due to its simplicity. Using a less computationally complex and specifically binary-classifying model allows for further analysis of where the inferences and assignments of the models are coming from. As we will show later, this simplicity allows us to adjust the dataset and evaluate how those changes affect the model outcomes.   LR is typically used as a binary classifier. 35 , 36  This is because of the mathematics behind the architecture; the training of the models is working to identify the classification by maximizing the distance between the classes. This approach is very similar to support vector machines as both models maximize separation instead of minimizing an error function. This restriction of being a binary classifier coupled with using the entire mass spectrum as features are our reasoning for choosing to generate each model for the purpose of either identifying one specific functional group or one functional group classification. As we will explore later, specializing each of the models allows for the greatest model fit for that functional group as well as providing an avenue in which we can also describe how that greatest fit for each functional group was achieved. Results and Discussion   Acquiring the Dataset   The mass spectra were web-scraped from the NIST Webbook using a web-scraping implementation, the details of which are described in our previous publication. 25  In short, a web-scraping script was written to individually download the mass spectral files from each of the NIST Webbook pages that are labeled by Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) number. We obtained a total of 21,166 mass spectra. The files that were downloaded were in a JCAMP-DX file format. These files were then converted from JCAMP-DX into CSV. The process does remove the associated metadata; however, this information was not necessary for our analyses. Once the files had been converted to CSV, further preprocessing could be completed. More information regarding the preprocessing steps are reported in the  SI . Comparing Convolutional Neural Networks and Logistic Regression Feasibility   Both CNN and LR architectures were used to train functional group-specific models and models to look at the functional group classifications. CNN was initially chosen due to its success in identifying functional groups using an IR dataset collected from the NIST database in our previous publication. 25  Both approaches were each trained on a unique dataset, which was a subset of all the data web-scraped from NIST. Once all the models were trained, it was possible to look at the final training accuracies to determine how well the final models fit the data sets.   There are two metrics that we utilized to describe how well the models were performing. The first of these is final training accuracy. This metric describes the final ability to fit a segmented subset of the testing data after all the training steps have been completed. For our models, we do a 80:20 split of training and internal validation data, which is cited as being the most beneficial split. 37  The training accuracy is a description of how well the data can fit the data that it has been trained with. The second metric of interest is the final testing accuracy. This metric arises from how well the model can classify novel data. This metric is determined by analyzing previously withheld data using the models. Before generating the training datasets, certain spectra are removed from the total dataset and withheld for testing the final model accuracy. This metric is critical in understanding how we can expect our models to perform with data in the future.  Figure  2  shows the final training and testing accuracies for four different functional groups’ specific functional group models. Here, we compare the training accuracy ( Table S3 ) and testing accuracy ( Table S4 ) of the specific functional group models for mass ranges of 0–250 and 0–500  m/z . Model training and testing accuracies for all 19 functional groups explored are shown in the  SI .   Based only on the training accuracies, it appears that the models generated through CNNs should show a greater final accuracy in a specific case than the LR-based models. The training accuracy values, however, do not tell the entire story. This highlights one of the main erroneous assumptions that is commonly made about ML. A model with an incredibly high fit of the training data is not necessarily better at describing novel samples. This metric is better described through the testing accuracy. This trend holds true for both the functional group-specific ( Figure  3 A,C) and functional group-generalized models ( Figure  3 B,D).   Figure 3.     Open in a new tab   Results of the training and testing for four specific functional groups and the three functional group classifications. (A, B) Final training accuracy and accuracy of identifying the training portion of the data after the final training step has passed for both the functional group-specific and functional group-generalized models. For example, these plots would suggest that the CNN-based approach should be better at correctly identifying the aldehydes and ketones and that the LR-based approach should have an edge on the nitro group and the alkyl aldehydes. This, however, does not tell the full story. (C, D) Final test accuracies for the functional group-specific and functional group-generalized models. The testing accuracy of the models is the accuracy of the models when presented with new previously unseen data shows that a high training accuracy does not correlate necessarily with a high final testing accuracy. The final training and testing scores for each of the functional groups’ models are presented in the SI ( Tables S3 and S4  for specific functional groups and  Tables S5 and S6  for the generalized functional groups). A question that arose during this analysis was why the transfer learning worked so well with the IR data and so poorly with the MS data. 25  The reasoning for this discrepancy likely falls under the differences in the atomic processes that are described with that technique. For the IR data, because it is vibrational spectroscopy, we see the signals taking broader peaks that are influenced by the bonding environment. This means that phase and having other molecular species in solution can lead to shifting those vibrational peaks. These broad and shifting peaks are both benefited by the transfer learning process. The broad peaks allow them to not be computationally removed when the mathematical convolutions occur. In fact, these convolutions make the model less sensitive to peak shifting on the range of tens of wavenumbers. These aspects make transfer learning promising for vibrational techniques. On the other hand, comparing mass peaks that are only a couple of mass units apart from each other are likely describing entirely different fragmentation patterns or isotopic ratios. MS data also has incredibly narrow peaks that can be missed entirely if they are low in intensity during the mathematical convolutions. These factors are likely why transfer learning using Inception V3 was successful with the IR based data and unsuccessful with the MS data. Upon the determination that the LR-based models performed better on correctly identifying new data compared to the CNN models, we decided to use the LR-based models for the remainder of this study. Logistic Regression’s Ability to Manage Specific Functional Group Classifications   The choice to switch to logistic regression arose from wanting to utilize binary classifiers. By simplifying each model to a binary classifier, it is more feasible to fully explain the model output. Given our dataset, it is easier to optimize one model per functional group than one model predicting on all functional groups. For example, there are thousands of aromatic-containing spectra and less than 400 amide samples. This would impart artificial bias that would have to be mathematically manufactured to avoid. Training one model would likely lead to the functional groups’ penalization because of less examples and ultimately not being identified as consistently or frequently.   There is a large variation in the final training and testing accuracies for each of the different functional group models. This is to be expected due to the large variation between the fragment fingerprint for each functional group. A total of 17/20 of the models had a final testing accuracy of over 70%, and 13/20 of our models had a final test accuracy of over 75%.  Figure  4  shows the final training and test accuracies of all the models.   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   Scatter plot depicting all the final training and testing accuracies of each of the 20 different models. These final accuracies are highly variable with respect to the functional group that they are to be classifying. The highest preforming models, in terms of final testing accuracy, were the nitro, methyl, and aromatic (A)-containing models. This makes sense because with each of these models, there are fragments that we can point to that would assist the model in its assignments. The nitro model could utilize the NO +  and NO 2 +  fragments. The methyl model can look for the CH 3 +  ion, and the A-containing model can look for the loss of a benzene ring at 78  m / z .   Conversely, the poorest-performing models are those of ketone, amine, and alcohol. These models likely struggle since the current methods of identifying these functional groups rely on looking at mass losses and looking for the products of secondary processes including rearrangements and cleavages of certain areas of the molecule. These processes include α and β cleavages, McLafferty rearrangements, and radical losses, among others.   Similarly, when looking at the generalized functional groups, the N-containing and A-containing models both performed better than the O-containing model, albeit the O-containing model still had a final testing accuracy of approximately 70%. This likely has to do with the fact that there is clear logic for identifying odd numbers of both nitrogen and aromatics in mass spectra. For the odd nitrogen spectra, we can look for odd-numbered peaks suggesting the presence of nitrogen and we can look for a mass at 78  m / z  to look for benzene, a common aromatic ring that shows up in organic molecules. Identifying Mass Peaks that Guide Model Assignments   Feature selection and feature engineering are common practices in the development of ML models, and there are a large variety of methods to determine which features generate the best model outcomes. 38 − 42  Feature selection differs from feature engineering; feature engineering works to reduce data dimensionality through convolving or creating statistical representations of the data through processes like principal component analysis or linear discriminant analysis, among others, 43  and feature selection works to reduce the raw data down to the most important features within. 42 , 44 , 45  Both processes can be done manually or automatically via a statistical method. 46  Using feature engineering and feature selection processes provides different benefits to the modeling process.   To evaluate and explain the logic behind the model’s assignments, we looked at the coefficients that the model used in its final iteration. For each feature, in our case each mass, there is an associated coefficient describing the weight that that mass is used to determine if the functional group is present for that class. Positive peaks correlate to an increased likelihood that that functional group is present, and negative peaks correlate to the increased likelihood that that functional group is absent. The larger the intensity in either direction, the higher the correlation between that mass and the class that it is referring to.  Figure  5  shows the overlapped final coefficients for both the generalized functional group models ( Figure  5 A) and the specific functional group models ( Figure  5 B).   Figure 5.     Open in a new tab   Model coefficients for each of the different trained models as a function of mass fragment. (A) Coefficients for the generalized functional group models and (B) coefficients for the specific functional group models. All the coefficient plots for the individual models are presented in the  SI . When looking at all the aggregated coefficients, it looks like the most impactful mass region to the analysis is below 100  m / z . This suggests that the model would perform similarly well if those were the only features given to the training set. This is an important conclusion that suggests that for this kind of analysis, having a large mass range of available data is not necessary as long as the low mass range (less than 100  m / z ) is thoroughly defined.   To further understand how the different models were doing their assignments, we developed a method to look at the impact of each peak on the final training and testing accuracies. To analyze the features, we trained each model 300 times, and in each iteration of training one mass was removed. These final training and testing accuracies were compared to the accuracy of the model when it had access to all 300 mass units. This was used to identify peaks that were beneficial to the model’s ability to identify functional groups and those that were hindering the models in making their assignments. The peaks that were beneficial led to a decrease in model accuracy when removed; the larger the discrepancy, the more impactful the peak. On the other hand, peaks that were causing more false assignments, when removed, led to an increase in model accuracy. Looking at the most beneficial peaks for the generalized functional group classification models leads to some interesting and promising results.  Table  1  has these values for the generalized functional group classifications. The beneficial peaks for the specific functional groups as well as the peaks that decreased the final accuracies (the peaks that confuse the inference) are presented in the SI ( Table S8  for the beneficial peaks and  Table S9  for the hindersome peaks.)   Table 1. Mass Values of the Top 5 Most Impactful Positively Correlated Peaks for Each of the Functional Group-Generalized Models a .