>Methods   Overview   For each GBD round, newly available data and refined methods are used to update the complete time series of metrics from 1990 to the latest year of analysis. GBD 2023 results therefore supersede all previous estimates. GBD 2023 methods closely followed those used in GBD 2021. 7 ,  13  A summary of the methods is given, with emphasis on any notable improvements; a more detailed description of all methods is available in  appendix 1  and  appendix 2 . Based on review and approval by the GBD Scientific Council, which considers factors such as policy relevance, data availability, and epidemiological profile, we report here for the first time on health outcomes for five additional causes: ulcerative colitis; Crohn's disease; thyroid diseases; other endocrine, metabolic, blood, and immune disorders; and electrocution. The cause introduced in GBD 2021 titled “other pandemic-related outcomes” was removed because improved data availability since 2021 allowed for more precise assignment of pandemic-related outcomes to specific causes. 16  These changes bring the total number of diseases and injuries reported in GBD 2023 to 375. We improved our burden estimates through the incorporation of data from more than 35 000 new sources. Moreover, we began transitioning from our principal tool to model prevalence—disease modelling meta-regression version 2.1 (DisMod-MR 2.1;  appendix 1  section 2.6)—to an updated version, disease modelling age-time (DisMod-AT), with one of the main improvements being the ability to factor cohort effects over time and location-level covariates by age and sex ( appendix 1  section 2.7). This allows us to model changes in prevalence or incidence among specific age cohorts as population segments grow older to more accurately reflect how disease patterns evolve over time, which is important for diseases with rapidly changing epidemiology, such as diabetes. Data availability by location and year for modelling of disease and injury burden is included in  appendix 1  (figures S1, S2). Additionally, changes to the estimation of impairments and aetiologies have been made for GBD 2023 ( appendix 1  sections 2.8, 6). Similarly, by adding more than 16 000 new data sources on risk factors, we improved estimates of risk-attributable burden ( appendix 2  table S7). For GBD 2023, we conducted 85 new or updated systematic reviews of the literature on relative risk ( appendix 2  section 2.1.3) and risk factor exposure ( appendix 2  section 2.2.1). No new risk factors were added for GBD 2023; however, based on new evidence or further specification of outcomes, 50 new risk–outcome pairs were added, eight of which were based on further specification of mediation factors. Two pairs were removed from the analysis ( appendix 2  table S3). Across all analytical components of the risk factor estimation process, 676 risk–outcome pairs were analysed for GBD 2023. Details of our standardised inclusion and exclusion criteria for GBD 2023 risk–outcome pairs are provided in  appendix 2  (section 2.1.1). We also updated our methods for certain risk–outcome pairs, such as lead exposure and ischaemic heart disease ( appendix 2  section 4). The inclusion of new data sources and methodological improvements for GBD 2023 contributed to improvements in internal consistency, trend stability, and cross-source harmonisation. Data sources and processing   Details for all data sources used for disease and injury burden and for risk factor estimation for GBD 2023 are available online via the GBD 2023 Sources Tool on the Global Health Data Exchange. All data sources underwent strict systematic quality assurance processes. 1  Data sources ensure quality by applying data-vetting protocols to assess internal consistency, completeness, and plausibility; using tools, such as MR-BRT (meta-regression—Bayesian, regularised, trimmed), to adjust for known biases; and cross-validating new sources against existing datasets.   Burden of diseases and injuries   DALY calculations for GBD 2023 were based on more than 120 000 cause-related data sources, of which more than 35 000 were newly added between GBD 2021 and the current release. Cause-related sources included more than 98 000 total entries, distributed over 50 000 incidence-related and 25 000 prevalence-related sources, and a range of other sources necessary for tracking severity splits, duration, and similar characteristics. GBD 2023 included newly incorporated data sources on numerous causes, including cardiovascular diseases (eg, ischaemic heart disease and ischaemic stroke), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, tuberculosis, asthma, and chronic kidney disease. Notable changes were most evident in chronic respiratory conditions and in specific regions where the inclusion of new data addressed gaps. Details on data sources for YLLs are documented in another publication 16  and are available via the GBD 2023 Sources Tool. Estimates of burden reported here draw from a wide range of sources, including scientific literature, household surveys, disease registries, and clinical informatics, as detailed in  appendix 1  (section 2.1). The process for conducting cause-specific literature reviews is detailed in  appendix 1  (section 2.1.1). The search strategy covered online research databases, public governmental and international organisation websites, and published reports, as well as contributions of primary data from GBD collaborators. The methods and data sources for fatal estimates, such as vital registration systems, are discussed in a separate publication. 16   Cause-related data with known biases, such as alternative case definitions or measurement methods, were adjusted using the meta-regression tool MR-BRT ( appendix 1  section 2.5). 15  The adjustment process involved analysing paired estimates based on reference and alternative case definitions for the same age, sex, location, and year. For data sources without sex-specific information, we applied a correction factor derived from the pooled, within-study sex ratios. Data missing both age and sex details were adjusted using a process (age-sex splitting) that leverages within-source sex ratios to adjust age-specific data from sources that reported by age and by sex separately. When data sources spanned wide age ranges (typically >25 years), we derived more granular age-specific estimates using age patterns based on other available data sources ( appendix 1  section 2.3.5).   Data processing also extended to clinical data. The comprehensive series of data-processing steps are detailed in  appendix 1  (section 2). We analysed data from several clinical settings, including inpatient hospital admissions, outpatient visits, and health insurance claims. For inpatient data reporting a single diagnosis, we adjusted data to account for factors such as re-admissions, non-primary diagnoses, and outpatient care. We made these adjustments by calculating age-sex-specific ratios by cause using RegMod, a new GBD regression modelling package, which was used in this instance to create correction factor models for clinical data ( appendix 1  section 2.2.5). To ensure that estimates of inpatient data accurately reflected population data, inpatient sources were scaled using estimates of total inpatient admission rates per capita for each location-year-age-sex for which demographic data were incomplete.   Moreover, we adjusted inpatient sources to account for disparities in health-care access across all locations by scaling estimates using a scalar developed for the Healthcare Access and Quality Index ( appendix 1  section 2.2.5). 17  These adjustments produce standardised, population-level clinical estimates that represent both the incidence and prevalence of causes and mitigate the impact of known biases in the data. Disease and injury burden attributable to risk factors   To estimate the burden of disease attributable to risk factors, we combined four inputs: exposure; relative risk of each health outcome associated with the risk factor; the theoretical minimum risk exposure level (TMREL); and deaths and burden for each of the health outcomes with which a risk factor is associated. In GBD 2023, we estimated the burden associated with 88 risk factors. The TMREL and deaths and burden for each health outcome associated with a risk factor are derived and did not require additional data, so data seeking for risk factor analyses focused on exposure and relative risks. The exposure estimation processes used more than 55 000 distinct data sources, about 16 000 of which were new for GBD 2023, related primarily to the incorporation of new data sources for various risk factors, such as sexual violence against children, intimate partner violence, bullying victimisation, high BMI, high fasting plasma glucose (FPG), and various dietary risk factors. These sources were identified through systematic reviews of risk factor exposure studies, in addition to other data that include household and health examination surveys and censuses, ground-sensing or remote-sensing data, and administrative records ( appendix 2  section 2.2.1).   Relative risk estimates were derived from meta-analyses incorporating more than 3800 distinct data sources, more than 900 of which were new for GBD 2023. Data used to estimate relative risks were identified and extracted through systematic literature reviews of randomised controlled trials and prospective cohort studies reporting fatal and non-fatal health outcomes associated with risk factor exposures, and from studies underlying risk–outcome meta-analyses ( appendix 2  section 2.1.3). Where data from randomised controlled trials or cohort studies were unavailable, odds ratios from case–control studies were potentially included in relative risk estimation (generally reflected by including a bias covariate in the burden-of-proof estimation framework). Across relative risk and exposure estimation processes, 85 new or updated systematic reviews were conducted. Decisions were made to undertake or prioritise reviews based on various circumstances, including the availability of literature providing new or more nuanced or detailed data, or newly available resources to support review of particular risk–outcome pairs.  Appendix 2  includes PRISMA diagrams for each of the 85 systematic reviews and risk factor-specific strategies to maximise data collection, search procedures, and bias assessment (section 4), and systematic review and bias assessment guidelines (section 2.1.3). For risk factor exposure data, MR-BRT was used to adjust for bias and perform age-sex splitting; further details are provided in  appendix 2  (section 2.2.2). Estimation methods   Burden of diseases and injuries   GBD 2023 estimated incidence, prevalence, YLDs, YLLs, and DALYs for 375 diseases and injuries: 371 with non-fatal outcomes and 292 with fatal outcomes. Specific diseases and injuries are organised within a four-level cause hierarchy. The broadest category—level 1—includes three large cause groupings of NCDs, CMNN diseases, and injuries. Level 2 categories are further disaggregated into specific subgroupings, such as cardiovascular diseases and transport injuries. Level 3 causes include specific causes (eg, stroke and road injuries). In some cases, level 3 causes are the most granular level of analysis; however, in other cases, causes are further disaggregated at level 4. Level 4 causes are the most specific (eg, ischaemic stroke and pedestrian road injuries). Detailed information on the GBD cause hierarchy is in  appendix 1  (table S3).   The modelling of prevalence and incidence was mainly conducted using DisMod-MR 2.1, a Bayesian disease modelling meta-regression tool. 7  A new tool, DisMod-AT, modelled prevalence and incidence for four causes: type 1 diabetes, major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, and autism spectrum disorders ( appendix 1  section 2.7). For certain diseases and injuries, the use of spatiotemporal Gaussian process regression (ST-GPR) models allowed for the analysis of data that are both heterogeneous and incomplete and which require statistical smoothing ( appendix 1  section 2.4). The methodology for cause-specific estimations, including the calculation of sequela-specific prevalence, is described in  appendix 1  (section 6).   To estimate YLDs, we calculated cause-age-sex-location-year-specific prevalence of sequelae (or duration of nature of injury) and then multiplied these prevalence values by their respective disability weights for each disease and injury. The process for estimating disability weights is detailed further in  appendix 1  (section 2.9). YLDs were adjusted for comorbidity, assuming that a multiplicative function of disability weights accounts for the co-occurrence of non-fatal causes within individuals. YLLs were derived by multiplying the cause-age-sex-location-year-specific number of deaths by the standard life expectancy at the age of death for each cause, as detailed by the GBD 2023 Causes of Death Collaborators. 16  DALYs were computed by summing YLDs and YLLs ( appendix 1  section 4). A complementary measure to DALYs—healthy life expectancy (HALE), which measures a population's mean number of years of life spent in full health—was calculated using YLDs per capita and age-specific mortality rates by location, age, sex, year, and cause. 16  This method was developed by Sullivan 19  and described in  appendix 1  (section 5). Both DALYs and HALE were estimated by location, age, sex, and year. More comprehensive details can be found in  appendix 1  (sections 4, 5). Cause-specific disease and injury estimation methods were updated for GBD 2023 for several causes, including for rheumatic heart disease, autism spectrum disorders, and HIV/AIDS. Details on these and other cause-specific updates are in  appendix 1  (section 6). Disease and injury burden attributable to risk factors   Risk factor analysis was based on the comparative risk assessment framework, which is premised on a causal web of hierarchically organised, modifiable risk factors that affect health outcomes 20 ,  21  ( appendix 2  section 2, table S2). Risk factors were classified into a four-level hierarchy with the broadest categories—environmental and occupational, behavioural, and metabolic risks—at level 1. Level 1 categories were then further disaggregated, allowing for analysis focused both on risk groups at level 2 (eg, air pollution) and on increasingly granular risk factors at levels 3 (eg, particulate matter pollution) and 4 (eg, household air pollution from solid fuels). GBD 2021 and GBD 2023 included 88 total risk factors across hierarchy levels ( appendix 2  table S1). Risk factor definitions and modelling details are in  appendix 2  (section 4).   Described briefly are the methods for estimating each of the four inputs into assessing risk-attributable burden: exposure, relative risk of each health outcome associated with the risk factor, the TMREL, and deaths and burden for each of the health outcomes with which a risk factor is associated.   Methods to estimate mean levels of exposure to each risk factor by age-sex-location-year varied across risks. Data for most risks were extracted from household surveys and the scientific literature and were modelled using either ST-GPR or DisMod-MR 2.1. 7 ,  13  Some risks (eg, ambient air pollution) required other approaches, such as satellite data and geospatial analysis for environmental exposures. For most risks, the distribution of exposure across individuals was estimated by modelling a measure of dispersion, usually the SD, and fitting an ensemble of parametric distributions to the predicted mean and SD ( appendix 2  section 2.2.3 [step 2]). Summary exposure values (SEVs), reflecting both the prevalence of a given risk factor and the relative harm caused by that risk factor, were calculated from exposure estimates ( appendix 2  section 2 [step 5]).   For the GBD 2023 risk factor analysis, we evaluated a total of 88 risk factors and 159 health outcomes, including four outcomes (bipolar disorder, bulimia nervosa, conduct disorder, and schizophrenia) that in previous iterations of the GBD had not been linked to any risk factors. At the most detailed risk and cause level, relative risks for a total of 676 risk–outcome pairs—including pairs in mediation pathways and pairs for which, by definition, a fixed percentage (often 100%) of the disease is attributed to the risk—were estimated. This included 50 new risk–outcome pairs, while two previously included pairs—child wasting and malaria, and high alcohol use and nasopharynx cancer—were excluded for not meeting inclusion criteria or for overlapping with other outcomes ( appendix 2  table S3).   For 256 of the pairs for which standard effect size analyses were applicable to estimate the relative risk, we applied our burden-of-proof meta-regression approach. 13 ,  14 ,  15  The burden-of-proof framework used a range of systematic strategies, including ensemble spline models to capture the potentially non-linear shape of the risk–outcome relationship, robust likelihood-based trimming of outliers, covariate selection and adjustment to account for known variation in input study design characteristics, and quantification and incorporation of remaining between-study heterogeneity into uncertainty. See  appendix 2  (section 2.1.2–2.1.8 [step 1]) for details.   The burden-of-proof approach further generates a burden-of-proof risk function (BPRF), which is conservatively defined for harmful risks as the 5th and for protective risks as the 95th quantile relative risk curve, inclusive of between-study heterogeneity, closest to null. The BPRF extends relative risk estimates using the same data inputs and modelling processes to provide a conservative measure of both effect size and evidence strength that incorporates between-study heterogeneity to formally account for divergence or convergence in findings across input studies. For ease of interpretation and comparison, risk–outcome scores (ROSs) are calculated summarising average BPRFs across the data-dense range (15th to 85th percentile) of risk exposure levels reported in the input studies, and summary scores are mapped to a (one to five) star rating system, with higher positive ROS values and more stars corresponding to incrementally stronger evidence for the risk–outcome relationship ( appendix 2  section 2.1.6, table S8). The uncertainty intervals (UIs) for relative risks estimated with burden-of-proof methods in this analysis include between-study heterogeneity for all risk factors except tobacco use, given concerns raised during GBD 2021 regarding the interpretation of the resulting wide UIs with respect to policy. Efforts to review and potentially revise the incorporation of unexplained between-study heterogeneity in UIs are part of regular GBD methodology updates. For the purposes of this combined GBD 2023 disease burden and risk factor analysis, we present BPRF-related metrics only in  appendix 3  (table S18). More detailed BPRF results can be found in GBD 2021 Risk Factor Collaborators 13  and other risk-specific papers, 22 ,  23 ,  24 ,  25 ,  26 ,  27  and accessed through the Burden of Proof tool .   For each risk factor, the TMREL—the counterfactual level of exposure that is theoretically possible and would minimise health risks in exposed populations—was estimated either on the basis of epidemiological evidence quantifying risk–outcome relationships and the distribution of observed risk factor exposure (eg, ozone air pollution), or on the basis of risk factor definition (eg, smoking;  appendix 2  section 2 [step 3], table S4). Differing TMRELs reflect the range of behavioural, metabolic, and environmental risk factors, including those for which zero exposure is theoretically achievable and those for which non-zero levels reflect minimum risk.   For each risk–outcome pair, estimates of exposure, TMREL, and relative risk were used to compute the population attributable fraction (PAF; the proportional difference between disease or injury burden at current levels of risk factor exposure and the burden that would have occurred had the population been exposed to the risk factor at the TMREL;  appendix 2  section 2 [step 4]). For associations involving risk factors that act on outcomes via intermediate risks (ie, many risk factors, particularly dietary risks, are associated with disease outcomes mediated through metabolic risks, such as a relationship between diet high in sodium and hypertensive heart disease mediated through high SBP), PAFs were adjusted based on values estimated in the GBD 2023 mediation matrix ( appendix 2  section 2 [step 6], table S5). Eight additional risk–outcome pairs were incorporated in the 2023 matrix, for a total of 165 mediated pairs ( appendix 2  table S6).   To calculate measures of risk-attributable burden—ie, the disease burden (DALYs, deaths, YLLs, or YLDs) attributable to a particular risk factor or combination of risks—PAFs were multiplied by the estimated disease burden associated with particular outcomes ( appendix 2  section 2 [step 7]). There have been several updates to the estimation of risk-attributable burden for GBD 2023, including for outcomes such as ischaemic heart disease, with prevalence and disease burden now modelled directly rather than on the basis of non-specific chest pain symptoms, and for risk factors such as lead exposure, with one of the important changes being that the effect of lead on ischaemic heart disease is now estimated directly, whereas this effect was previously exclusively mediated via high SBP. Additionally, names and case definitions were updated for some risk factors, such as sexual violence against children (previously childhood sexual abuse), and the TMREL was revised for one risk factor: diet high in trans fatty acids. See  appendix 2  (section 4) for all GBD 2023 risk-specific methods.   For assessments of model robustness for the primary models used in estimating disease and injury burden and risk-attributable burden, refer to  appendix 2  section 2.2.3 for ST-GPR,  appendix 1  section 4.5 of GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries Collaborators 6  for DisMod-MR,  appendix 1  section 6 for DisMod-AT, and Zheng and colleagues 14  for burden-of-proof methods. GBD research and reporting practices   This research complies with the GATHER statement; 28  a completed GATHER checklist is provided in  appendix 1  (table S2). The University of Washington Institutional Review Board approved the GBD study (STUDY00009060) up to July 26, 2026. The software used for analyses included Python (version 3.10.4), Stata (version 13.1), and R (version 4.2.1). The statistical code used in GBD 2023 is publicly available online. An international network of collaborators helped to provide, review, and analyse the available data to generate health metrics; GBD 2023 drew on the expertise of more than 14 000 collaborators from more than 160 countries and territories.   All GBD 2023 estimates for diseases, injuries, and risk factors are reported by age, sex, location, and year for 25 age groups from early neonatal (0–6 days) to 95 years and older; for males, females, and all sexes combined; for every year from 1990 to 2023; and in 204 countries and territories grouped into 21 regions and seven super-regions. The super-regions are central Europe, eastern Europe, and central Asia; high income; Latin America and the Caribbean; north Africa and the Middle East; south Asia; southeast Asia, east Asia, and Oceania; and sub-Saharan Africa ( appendix 1  section 1.1–1.2). GBD 2023 also produced estimates for 660 subnational locations in 20 countries (Brazil, China, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Italy, Iran, Japan, Kenya, Mexico, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, the UK, and the USA). Results are also presented by Socio-demographic Index (SDI) quintile, which is a composite measure of lag-distributed income per capita, average years of education, and fertility rates among females younger than 25 years. 29  Each location at the most specific level is assigned an SDI value ranging from 0 (lowest income and educational attainment, and highest fertility) to 100 and then grouped into quintiles from low SDI to high SDI ( appendix 1  table S12).   Estimates are reported here as absolute counts and as rates per 100 000 person-years, with age-standardised rates calculated using the GBD 2023 world standard population 30  to account for varying age structures across populations. Count data are presented to three significant figures, and rates are presented to one decimal place. Uncertainty was propagated throughout the estimation process. Mean estimates for all metrics reported represent the mean value across 250 draws from the e