>Materials and methods   Experimental pipeline   Yeast cultivation   The prototrophic  S. cerevisiae  strains ( MATa can1∆::STE2pr-SpHIS5 his3∆1 lyp1∆0 ho − ) were kindly provided by Prof. Joseph Schacherer [ 51 ]. The KO strain ( sdh1 Δ) used had the  SDH1  gene (encoding the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase) replaced by the kanamycin resistance cassette (kanMX). A strain with the kanMX cassette in the  HO  gene was used as the wild-type (WT) control strain. Yeast strains were cultivated in filter-sterilized minimal yeast nitrogen base (5 g/L) medium without ammonium sulphate (YNB w/o ammonium sulphate, MP Biochemicals) containing 20 g/L D-glucose (Sigma) and 1.7 g/L ammonium sulphate (Sigma), and the pH was adjusted to 5.5 (this medium is hereafter designated as  12 C-YNB medium). D-Glucose was replaced with uniformly carbon labelled D-glucose (20 g/L, U- 13 C 6 , 99%, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc.) in the  13 C-YNB and  13 C 15 N-YNB conditions, while the ammonium sulphate was replaced with uniformly nitrogen labelled ammonium sulphate (1.7 g/L,  15 N 2 SO 4 , 99%, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc.) in  15 N-YNB and  13 C 15 N-YNB conditions.   Yeast glycerol stock solutions [ 23 ] were used to inoculate  12 C-YNB cultures with a single colony of the respective strains from agar plates (20 g/L agar, 20 g/L D-glucose, 6.7 g/L YNB with ammonium sulphate) after incubation of minimum 3 days at 30 °C. For a complete experiment, 12 single colonies of each strain were used to inoculate 5-mL pre-cultures for the four media conditions ( 12 C-YNB,  13 C-YNB,  15 N-YNB, and  13 C 15 N-YNB) in 14-mL cell culture tubes (CELLSTAR® Cell Culture Tubes, Greiner bio-one) that were shaken at 30 °C and 200 rpm (Infors HT Multitron Standard). The cell densities of the pre-cultures were measured 24 h after inoculation to set the starting OD 600  of the main cultures (in D48 plates or SF) to 0.025. For the D48 plates (Axygen, 5 mL 48 rectangular wells, V-bottom, P-5ML-48-C-D), 4-mm glass beads were added to each well in order to improve the mixing [ 44 ]. For the presented work, twenty-four wells of the D48 plates were filled with 3 mL of each main culture. The remaining wells were filled with either sterile YNB medium (without carbon or nitrogen source,  n  = 8) or sterile  12 C-YNB ( n  = 16) to prepare extraction blanks (the glucose-free YNB medium blanks were used for the PAVE data analysis;  12 C-YNB blanks were used to estimate cross-over between wells during cultivation and metabolite extraction). The D48 plates were sealed with a gas-permeable lid (AeraSeal film, Sigma-Aldrich), and the cultivation was conducted at 30 °C and shaken at 400 rpm (Edmund Bühler, TiMix 2). The SF cultivations were performed in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks filled with 25 mL medium at 30 °C and shaken at 200 rpm (Infors HT Multitron Standard).   Using the above-described growth conditions, and in an independent experiment, cell concentrations and extracellular glucose levels were measured hourly to estimate the growth and glucose uptake rate of the yeast WT strain for the SF and D48 cultivation method in the  12 C-YNB medium. Cell concentration was measured using a Multisizer Z3 Coulter Counter (30 μm measurement capillary, Beckman Coulter) after dilution in ISOTON II solution (Beckman Coulter). The substrate consumption was measured in sterile-filtered (0.2 μm cellulose syringe filter, VWR Chemicals) spent media that were stored at  − 20 °C until D-glucose measurement using a YSI (Yellow Springs Instruments 2900 Series Biochemistry Analyser). Sampling and extraction of intracellular metabolites   Cell pellets were harvested during the exponential growth phase (16 h) using a fast centrifugation treatment [ 52 ]. For the D48 approach, prior to centrifugation, 200 μL of culture per well was transferred, using a multichannel pipette (E4 XLS, 8 channel electronic pipette, 100–1200  μ L ,  Rainin), to another D48 plate containing 2.8 mL ISOTON II solution per well for the biovolume measurements (also referred to as  M easured   Biovolume  [ μ L/mL]) using the Multisizer Z3 Coulter Counter. The D48 plates were centrifuged for 20 s at 4 °C and 4816 g (Heraeus Multifuge × 3R, Thermo Scientific), the supernatant was discarded by plate inversion, and the cell pellets were flash-frozen by placing the plates in liquid nitrogen. The above-described sampling procedure using the D48 approach took approximately 6 min, per D48 plate, i.e. 7.5 s per sample. Analogously, 1 mL of the SF cultivations was sampled for biovolume measurements, and 2-mL aliquots was transferred to fresh 2-mL Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged for 20 s at 4 °C and 16000 g (Centrifuge 5415 R, Eppendorf). The supernatants were discarded, and cell pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The sampling time for the SF cultivation method was approximately 16 min for 27 samples (24 biological samples representing three biological replicates for each of the WT and KO strains in the four cultivation conditions needed in the PAVE approach and three YNB glucose-free extraction blanks) or 35.5 s per sample. For both experimental setups, metabolites were extracted using biphasic liquid–liquid extraction (MTBE:MeOH:H 2 O 65:20:15) [ 53 ]. For the D48 plates, 635 μL of MeOH:H 2 O mixture (55:45,  − 20 °C) was added to the pellets. Cells were resuspended by shaking at 1000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature (Thermomixer Comfort, Eppendorf) and 1154 μL MTBE (− 20 °C) was added for metabolite extraction. The plates were covered with an empty D48 plate, sealed with parafilm (PARAFILM® M, Merck) and tape, and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C and shaken at 700 rpm (Thermomixer Comfort). The whole cell lysates were transferred to 2-mL Eppendorf tubes for subsequent phase separation. During this extraction procedure, all pipetting steps were performed using a multichannel pipette for the D48 approach. The same metabolite extraction procedure and extraction fluid volumes were applied to the SF samples but through manual pipetting. The extraction procedure for the D48 approach took approximately 12 min per D48 plate (i.e. 15 s per sample), compared to approximately 18 min for 27 samples in the SF approach (i.e. 40 s per sample). For both methods, phase separation between the upper, nonpolar phase (MTBE), and the lower aqueous phase (MeOH:H 2 O) was achieved by centrifugation for 10 min at 4 °C and 16000 g (Centrifuge 5415 R, Eppendorf). Subsequently, 750 μL and 300 μL of the upper nonpolar and lower aqueous phase, respectively, were transferred to 1.5-mL Eppendorf tubes. To improve evaporation, 200 μL MeOH were added to the nonpolar phase, and all metabolite extracts were dried overnight in a SpeedVac at  − 4 °C (Labconco). LC-HRMS analyses   Adapted from already published work [ 54 ,  55 ], the dried polar extracts were resuspended in 80:20 ACN:H 2 O containing 10 μM 4-chloro-L-phenylalanine (Sigma-Aldrich) as the internal standard, while the dried nonpolar extracts were reconstituted in 90:10 MeOH:toluene containing 440 nM 12-[(cyclohexylcarbamoyl)amino]dodecanoic acid (Sanbio) as the internal standard. Samples were normalized by adjusting the  Resuspension Volume  [mL] to obtain a  Fixed Biovolume  of 10 μL/mL using the  Measured Biovolume  [μL/mL] as follows:   R e s u s p e n s i o n V o l u m e [ mL ] = M e a s u r e d B i o v o l u m e μ L mL × S a m p l i n g V o l u m e mL × C o l l e c t e d P h a s e [ mL ] E x t r a c t i o n F l u i d V o l u m e mL × F i x e d B i o v o l u m e [ μ L mL ]   The  Sampling Volume  [mL] refers to the collected culture aliquots (e.g. 2.8 mL from the D48 plates and 2 mL from the SFs), the  Collected Phase  [mL] is 0.75 mL for the organic and 0.3 mL for the aqueous phase, and the  Extraction Fluid Volume  [mL] refers to the added organic solvent (1.154 mL MTBE for the organic/nonpolar phase, 0.635 mL MeOH:H 2 O for the aqueous phase).   The obtained cell extracts, after resuspension to 10 μL/mL biovolume, were diluted further to a final biovolume of 7.5 μL/mL for injection. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C and 16000 g (Centrifuge 5415 R, Eppendorf), and 50 μL of the supernatant was transferred into HPLC vials containing 250 μL inserts.   Metabolic and lipidomic profiling was conducted using a Thermo Vanquish LC coupled to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Polar metabolites (cell extracts from aqueous phase) were measured using a previously described HILIC method [ 54 ], and 5 μL of the extracts was injected. Nonpolar metabolites (cell extracts from organic phase) were measured using a previously described RP method for lipid detection [ 54 ] with the adapted DDA parameters (AGC target of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 70 ms), and 5 μL of extracts was injected.   A schematic representation of the experimental approach and techniques used in this study is summarized in Fig.  1 .   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   High-throughput sample generation using a D48-well plate. (1) Cultivation: yeast strains are cultivated in a D48 well plate in the presence of unlabelled and/or stable isotope-labelled substrates. (2) Normalization: before pelleting the cells, 200 μL aliquots of the cell cultures are transferred into a new D48 plate containing ISOTONE II (Beckman Coulter) solution for biovolume (μL/mL) determination using the Multisizer Z3 (Beckman Coulter). The latter is used to calculate the resuspension volume for the dried metabolite extracts prior to LC-MS analysis. (3) Cell pelleting: fast centrifugation treatment. (4) Quenching: the bottom of the plate is immerged in liquid nitrogen. (5) Metabolite extraction: the cell pellets are resuspended in pre-cooled MeOH:H 2 O (− 20 °C). After resuspension,  − 20 °C pre-cooled MTBE is added for metabolite extraction. After the incubation step, the cell extracts of each well are transferred into 2-mL Eppendorf tubes. (6) Phase separation: the cell extracts are centrifuged in order to achieve a phase separation between the upper organic phase (MTBE) and the lower aqueous phase (MeOH:H 2 O). (7) Sample evaporation: the collected phases are evaporated overnight using a SpeedVac vacuum device (Labconco). (8) Sample reconstitution: samples are reconstituted, adapting the resuspension volume to the biovolume (μL/mL) for the purpose of normalization. (9) Untargeted LC-MS analysis: the biovolume-normalized samples are analysed by HILIC-MS (metabolomics) or RP-LC-MS (lipidomics). Abbreviations are reported in the abbreviation list Intracellular succinate quantification   Intracellular  13 C succinate concentrations were quantified in uniformly  13 C-labelled cell extracts with a newly designed method based on spiking with unlabelled ( 12 C) succinate. The spike concentration was estimated using the measured intracellular  13 C succinic acid areas and an external calibration curve generated with unlabelled succinate. Data analysis   The parameter settings for the different software described below (Proteowizard, MS-DIAL, PAVE, Shinyscreen, SIRIUS CSI:FingerID) are all available in the electronic supplementary material (ESM, Section S3).   Computational workflow   Raw LC-HRMS files of all samples (including extraction and procedural blanks) were first imported into MS-DIAL 4.8 [ 6 ] for peak detection, deconvolution, and alignment. Through this common peak-picking alignment input, each detected feature became a unique numeric MS-DIAL ID that was used to identify features in the subsequent data analysis. This feature list was imported into the PAVE 2.0 MATLAB GUI [ 56 ] using MATLAB version R2017b. Raw files were converted to mzXML files (Proteowizard, v3.0.20022-e71f69e07, [ 57 ]) and parsed to generate a single M file for each experimental setup, strain/condition, and ionization mode (.mat format,  n  = 4 for positive ionization mode,  n  = 4 for negative ionization mode, available in the ESM, GNPS [ 58 ]). The credentialing data analysis followed the PAVE workflow [ 41 ] and was performed separately for each strain and experimental condition tested using the generated M files (SF-WT, SF-KO, D48-WT, and D48-KO), and a list of credentialed features for each strain and condition was generated (ESM, Zenodo, files F03-04 [ 59 ]). The MS-DIAL ID was used to eliminate duplicate features by merging the credentialed features obtained for the WT and KO strains in each experimental setup after the credentialing analysis of PAVE. This generated list, containing unique features per experimental setup (referred to as “Total Features Exp. Setup” by the further steps of the data analysis), was used as the input for the next step of the computational pipeline (available by the ESM, Zenodo, files F05-08 [ 59 ]). Quality control of credentialed features using Shinyscreen   The feature list fed into PAVE and the resultant carbon and nitrogen count of credentialed features was used to calculate the theoretical  13 C 15 N- m/z  for each feature. The calculated  13 C 15 N-mass shift was used to perform a credentialing quality control using Shinyscreen (v1.0.3 [ 49 ]). Converted mzXML  13 C 15 N files and the merged PAVE results coming from the same experimental setup (e.g. D48-WT-KO and SF-WT-KO, “Total Features Exp. Setup”) were used as the input. Features that showed the corresponding mass shift in the uniformly labelled data were retained (recognized by Shinyscreen and tagged with MS1 = TRUE, with results and data analysis steps available by ESM, Zenodo, files F05-08 [ 59 ]) and used for feature annotation and further data analysis. Feature annotation   For the HILIC-based analysis, the feature annotation was performed using a confidence level scheme [ 60 ]. Level 1 or confirmed structures were assigned to features having a RT,  m/z , and MS 2  match with authenticated reference standards; Level 2A or probable structure was assigned by MS 2  spectral matching using spectral databases; Level 3 or tentative structure candidates were obtained with the detected spectral information and predicted with in silico fragmentation tools; Level 4 or unequivocal chemical formula assignment was assigned using exact masses and natural isotope distributions; and Level 5 or mass of interest was assigned to features where the estimation of chemical composition or structure elucidation was not possible using the experimental data. The annotation was conducted by applying a hierarchical step-by-step approach using the cheminformatics software outlined below. Annotation with MS-DIAL   First, features were putatively annotated in MS-DIAL as Level 2A following manual review if they fulfilled the minimal criteria of a dot product  ≥ 50% and fragment presence  ≥ 50%. These features were reported as “Level 2A MS-DIAL”. The database used for feature annotation of the HILIC data was the MSMS-Public-(Neg/Pos)-VS15.msp (available on the MS-DIAL website [ 6 ]). Pre-screening and MS 2  spectra extraction   The remaining features underwent the pre-screening with Shinyscreen [ 50 ] for MS 1 /MS 2  alignment verification and MS 2  extraction. Only features that passed this quality control step were used for further annotation (ESM, GNPS [ 58 ]). Annotation with MetFrag and PubChemLite   The spectral information of features that passed the pre-screening with Shinyscreen were imported in MetFrag to achieve tentative identification using an early version of PubChemLite (PCLite, PubChemLite tier1 [ 61 ]). The R script for MetFrag is available on Zenodo (see ESM, Zenodo, file F10 [ 59 ]). To simplify the annotation, the spectral information of the samples showing the highest MetFrag overall score was used. Further, the carbon and nitrogen counts obtained with PAVE were compared with the molecular composition of the MetFrag-PCLite candidates. The correspondence of the number of carbon and nitrogen atoms between the PAVE and MetFrag-PCLite results allowed to annotate the features either as Level 2A (if a MoNA score  ≥ 90% was present) or as Level 3 and reported as “Level 2A MetFrag” or “Level 3 MetFrag”, respectively. The best three MetFrag Level 3 candidates were reported, together with the presence of annotation information from the “Interactions and Pathways” section, which indicates whether candidates may be of biological relevance [ 11 ]. Annotation with SIRIUS CSI:FingerID   The spectral information of the features remaining without annotation were imported into SIRIUS CSI:FingerID [ 13 ,  14 ]. Adapted software parameters were used, and all possible ionization adducts for the positive and negative modes were considered. The carbon and nitrogen number calculated by PAVE was specified in the CSI:FingerID parameters (see ESM, Section S3) where all the available databases and default adducts were used. Putative results were annotated as Level 3 when a possible structure candidate was found or as Level 4 in case of an unequivocal chemical formula match and reported as “Level 3 SIRIUS” or “Level 4 SIRIUS”, respectively. Unknown features   The remaining orphan features were annotated as “Level 5” with the PAVE-calculated carbon and nitrogen numbers. Manual quality control of credentialed features   To estimate the quality of the computational pipeline results, a manual quality control step was conducted for the features that passed the above presented computational workflow using the Xcalibur software (Qual Browser, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Here, the carbon and nitrogen count information obtained with PAVE was used to calculate the mass shift in the  13 C,  15 N, and uniformly labelled condition ( 13 C 15 N) of each feature. Features for which a corresponding unlabelled/uniformly labelled mass shift could not be confirmed upon this manual inspection were discarded and reported as false-positive credentialed features. The percentage was calculated as the ratio between false-positive credentialed features to the total amount of features which passed the computational pipeline. A schematic representation of the experimental setup and data analysis pipeline is shown in Fig.  2 .   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Experimental and computational pipelines used in this study. Yeast WT (ho:kanMX) and KO (sdh1Δ) strains were cultivated in the presence of unlabelled and/or labelled substrates in a D48 well plate and SF, followed by extraction of polar and nonpolar metabolites for LC-HRMS analysis. The raw data obtained was processed with the MS-DIAL peak-picker to obtain a feature list for the PAVE workflow. Credentialed features underwent a mass shift quality control using Shinyscreen. Features with confirmed mass shift were imported into MS-DIAL for Level 2A annotation. The MS 2  spectra of the remaining, non-annotated features were extracted with Shinyscreen and annotated as Levels 2A–3 with MetFrag combined with the PubChemLite (PCLite) chemical database, or as Levels 3–4 with Sirius CSI:FingerID. The non-annotated features are reported as Level 5 with their relative carbon and nitrogen number. Abbreviations are reported in the abbreviation list Lipid analysis   Only the first annotation step using MS-DIAL and the subsequently mass shift quality control with Shinyscreen were applied for the lipidomic analysis. The credentialed and curated lipid features were imported in MS-DIAL and putatively annotated as “Level 3 MS-DIAL” by a dot product  ≥ 40% [ 54 ]. Less strict annotation criteria compared to the HILIC data were used, since only an in silico spectral database was used for annotation. Level 1 metabolite identification   Authentic reference standards were used to achieve Level 1 identification using an RT matching window of ± 0.2 min, a mass accuracy ± 10 ppm, and MS 2  spectral matching. The identification results are provided in the supplementary files (see ESM, Zenodo, file F13 [ 59 ]). Data visualization and statistical analysis   Data visualization and statistical analysis were only applied to the metabolomics (not lipidomics) data, where credentialed peak heights were normalized to the IS (4-chloro-L-phenylalanine). The normalized data were uploaded to MetaboAnalyst 5.0 and Pareto-scaled prior to principal component analysis (PCA). Excel was used to calculate the coefficient of variance (defined as ratio between standard deviation and signal intensity average, CV %) distribution between the two approaches and generate histograms. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by FDR-corrected and Tukey’s HSD post hoc tests ( p  value  < 0.01) was conducted in R to compare metabolic changes between groups. The results of the statistical analysis are available in the supplementary files (see ESM, Zenodo, file F12 [ 59 ]). Results and discussion   In this part of the study, we aimed to benchmark our proposed high-throughput approach for yeast cultivation and sample generation for credentialing-based untargeted metabolomics against a classical shake flask (SF) approach, by comparing physiological parameters such as growth and glucose uptake rates and intracellular succinate concentration, as well as credentialing and annotation results. Furthermore, we discuss the distribution of CV values and investigated metabolic differences between the analysed WT and KO strains using a parametric ANOVA test (Turkey’s HSD).   Physiological constraints and intracellular succinate concentration   The growth and glucose uptake rates were monitored in the control yeast strain cultivated in D48 and SF format. Similar linear ranges of the growth rate (0.37 and 0.36 h −1 , respectively) and glucose consumption (4.17 and 3.45 mM∙h −1 , respectively) were observed in both cultivation modes (ESM, Figures  S1 – 3 ). In the SF condition, cells entered the glucose consumption phase earlier than in the D48 condition. We speculate that fine differences at the level of gene expression or other regulatory processes govern the entry into the high glucose uptake phase slightly differently in both experimental setups. Recently, deep-well well cultivation of  Pseudomonas putida  and  Pseudomonas aeruginosa  showed no remarkable differences in substrate assimilation compared to the SF approach, suggesting that deep-well based high-throughput methods represent a robust and flexible technique for performing microbial metabolic profiling [ 45 ]. The highly comparabl