>Materials and methods   Data   The Tox21 Data Challenge dataset, containing 12,699 instances, was obtained from the official website ( https://tripod.nih.gov/tox21/challenge/ ). The dataset was cleaned following a previously published data cleaning workflow [ 9 ], resulting in 7691 compounds with a unique first block (14 characters) of the InChIKey. Following the precautionary principle, a compound was deemed active in an assay if at least one active label was reported. Seven assays from the nuclear receptor panel were considered: activators of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), androgen receptor (AR), androgen receptor ligand-binding domain (AR.LBD), estrogen receptor (ER), estrogen receptor ligand-binding domain (ER.LBD), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR.gamma), and inhibitors of aromatase (Aromatase). A brief description of these assay endpoints is provided in Table  S1 . The cleaned dataset will hereafter be referred to as the  original dataset  (Fig.  1 A).   Fig. 1.     Open in a new tab   A  Overview of datasets.  B  Percentage of active compounds per assay in each dataset.  C  Tanimoto similarity distribution of active-active and inactive-active compounds calculated from SIRIUS + CSI:FingerID general mode (3494 bits) binary fingerprints, for each dataset. The dotted lines represent the maximum of active-active (orange) and inactive-active (blue) compound similarity distributions in the original dataset. Remaining assays are provided in Fig.  S2 . The color legend encoding the different datasets is shared between  B  and  C Due to the known scarcity of experimental HRMS data [ 13 ,  15 ], we undertook an extensive effort to compile the largest possible collection of MS 2  spectra for compounds from the Tox21 dataset, using both public and commercial sources. Positive-mode LC/electrospray ionization (ESI)/HRMS spectra were gathered from MassBank Europe [ 29 ] (version 06.2024), MoNA [ 30 ] (version August 2024, downloaded 17.08.2024), GNPS (downloaded 25.07.2024), and NIST [ 31 ] (version HRMS 2023). Spectra were cleaned and averaged over all reported collision energies. For more detailed data processing information, see Text S1. Compounds from the  original dataset  with available MS 2  spectra were selected to create the  MS 2  dataset  (4,274 unique compounds). This dataset was then split using an anticlustering algorithm [ 9 ,  32 ] into a  3 K training set  (80%, 3413 compounds) and a test set (20%, 861 compounds) to train the MS 2  similarity-based approaches and MS2Tox-3K models. During the splitting process, it was ensured that the test set did not contain any compounds used for training SIRIUS + CSI:FingerID (v5.8.6). Additionally, a separate   7 K training set , comprising 6830 compounds disjoint from the test set, was compiled for training the MS2Tox-7K model. Incorporating the 7 K training set allows taking advantage of all available data, as MS2Tox models can be trained on absolute fingerprints calculated directly from chemical structures. Furthermore, it enables evaluation of the influence of data set size by comparison of the MS2Tox-3K and MS2Tox-7K models. Assay endpoint prediction   Compound activity in nuclear receptor signaling pathways was predicted for LC/HRMS features with three different approaches: MN, an unsupervised approach that assigns labels based on MS 2  spectral similarity, here referred to as MN-MS 2 , and two supervised approaches: one that generates calibrated outcomes using CP from MS 2  spectral similarity and MS2Tox that employs molecular fingerprints.   Molecular networking   The potential endocrine-disrupting activity of LC/HRMS features is predicted with MN-MS 2  based on the activity labels (active as 1, inactive as 0) of directly connected nodes. Compounds marked as inconclusive in the original dataset were excluded from the analysis. Prediction performance was evaluated using a leave-one-out cross-validation approach. Parameters optimized for MN-MS 2  construction included the type of spectral similarity metric, similarity threshold, edge filtering strategy, and voting scheme.   Three spectral similarity metrics were evaluated. Firstly, greedy cosine score, which represents the cosine of the angle of the vector representations of two spectra. Secondly, modified cosine score, which directly matches fragment ions and those shifted due to mass differences induced by modifications before calculating the cosine similarity [ 33 ]. The greedy cosine score and the modified cosine score were calculated with the functions  CosineGreedy()  and  ModifiedCosine() , from the matchms [ 34 ] library in Python version 3.11.8, with a peak matching tolerance of 0.2 Da. Lastly, MS2DeepScore [ 35 ], an ML-based score, was calculated according to the published GitHub instructions [ 36 ]. MS2DeepScore utilizes a Siamese neural network, trained to predict the structural similarity, expressed through Tanimoto similarity of RDKit Daylight 2048-bit fingerprints, from the MS 2  spectral pairs [ 35 ]. MS2DeepScore has been previously shown to outperform other metrics like the modified cosine similarity and Spec2Vec [ 35 ]. The similarity threshold, defining the minimum similarity required to form an edge between nodes, was optimized from 0.0 to 0.9 in 0.1 increments. Low similarity thresholds usually lead to large clusters of connected nodes; therefore, an additional edge filtering strategy was explored, where either the six most similar MS 2  spectra were considered per node or all MS 2  spectra with similarity scores above the threshold were included. Two voting schemes for calculating the probability of biochemical activity of a node were used: (i) majority voting, where the number of active connected nodes is divided by the number of connected active and inactive nodes (Eq.  1 ); and (ii) weighted voting, where the respective edge value is taken into account, therefore allowing more similar nodes to have a higher impact on the calculated probability of biochemical activity (Eq.  2 ).     p majority = number of active neighbors number of neighbors   1       p weighted = ∑ similarity to active neighbors ∑ similarity to all neighbours   2     Since initial experiments showed that the similarity threshold strongly affects the number of connected nodes, classical true and false positive rates were modified to include a penalty for overly high thresholds that leave many nodes unconnected. The modified true positive rate (mTPR) and modified false positive rate (mFPR) are defined as follows:     mTPR = TP TP + FN + NCP   3       mFPR = FP FP + TN + NCN   4     where TP is true positive, FN is false negative, FP is false positive, TN is true negative, and NCP and NCN are unconnected positives and unconnected negatives, respectively. Based on the mTPR and mFPR, the area under the modified receiver operating characteristic (mROC-AUC) was calculated and used for hyperparameter optimization. For each assay, the top three hyperparameter combinations, yielding the highest mROC-AUC, were identified. Overall, MN-MS 2  leveraging MS2DeepScore combined with majority voting showed the best performance. The optimal similarity threshold was selected within this configuration.   The key assumption of using MN in NTS workflows is that structurally similar compounds exhibit similar biological activity. To evaluate this assumption, a reference network was constructed using the SIRIUS + CSI:FingerID general mode 3494-bit fingerprints calculated from SMILES representations of the compounds. Nodes in this network were connected based on their Tanimoto similarity. To clearly differentiate between approaches, the MS 2  spectral similarity-based network is referred to as MN-MS 2 , and the fingerprint similarity-based network as MN–FP. Optimized MN-MS 2  and MN–FP parameters are summarized in Table  S2 . Conformal predictions   CP, developed by Vovk et al. [ 37 ,  38 ], is a mathematically grounded framework that guarantees a user-defined error rate, provided the data is exchangeable. CP operates as a post-processing step after model training, using an independent calibration set, which is typically a subset randomly selected from the training data prior to model training. In this study, we utilized the Mondrian version [ 38 ] of CP, which recalibrates predictions separately for each class in the dataset, ensuring the specified error rate is maintained. A random forest (RF) classifier was used as the underlying base model, and as features, MS2DeepScore similarities to all chemicals in the training set were employed. For more detailed information regarding the CP procedure, see Text S2. Revising MS2Tox models for nuclear receptor assays   Model training was performed using Python (3.11.9), leveraging the XGBoost library to implement an XGBoost classifier. Hyperparameter optimization was performed using Optuna (v.3.6.1), with  RandomSampler()  on 500 trials and a fivefold stratified cross-validation ( StratifiedKFold  function from Scikit-learn) to preserve class distribution across folds. The optimized parameters and their selected values are provided in Table  S3 .   Two types of models were trained: MS2Tox-3K, using the   3 K training set , and MS2Tox-7K, using the larger   7 K training set . In contrast to our previous workflow, where fingerprint features were derived using the R package rcdk from SMILES strings, the current “reloaded” version employed a refined strategy. All SMILES were first standardized using the PubChem Power User Gateway (PUG) standardization service. Then, molecular fingerprints were computed directly using the standalone SIRIUS fingerprinter tool to ensure compatibility with the SIRIUS + CSI:FingerID (v5.8.6) format. To maintain consistency with prior work and improve robustness, only fingerprint features common to both positive and negative ESI modes were retained. Before training, feature cleaning was applied by removing zero- and near-zero-variance features and eliminating highly correlated fingerprint features to enhance model performance. Approach comparison   The performances of the three presented approaches were compared based on the false positive rate at 90% recall (FPR TPR=0.9 ), as suggested by Rahu et al. [ 9 ], and the false positive rate at 50% recall (FPR TPR=0.5 ). These two metrics are well suited to capture the objective of toxicity-based feature prioritization. An effective model should pinpoint as many hazardous features as possible, corresponding to 50% and 90% of EDs, respectively, while prioritizing only a small number of features associated with inactive chemicals. The number of such inactive features directly determines the additional workload in an NTS workflow. Therefore, lower FPR TPR=0.5  and FPR TPR=0.9  values indicate higher prioritization efficiency, as fewer inactive features are prioritized, leading to a more effective reduction of workload. Wastewater analysis   Wastewater treatment plant influent and effluent samples were stored at −20 °C, filtered through a 0.45-µm pore size syringe filter, and subsequently mixed with methanol to yield a methanol concentration of 20%. The samples and a blank were analyzed with LC/ESI/HRMS. A reversed-phase C18 chromatographic column with a gradient elution, facilitating a 0.1% formic acid water and acetonitrile as mobile phase components, was used for separation. The MS 1  and MS 2  spectra were acquired with a Q Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) in positive mode. Data-dependent acquisition was used to trigger MS 2  with an inclusion of 176 relevant water contaminants from the NORMAN suspect list [ 39 ] (Table  S4 ) combined with top5. All experimental details on the analysis of wastewater samples are presented in Text S3.   Samples were analyzed in duplicates. The resulting LC/HRMS features were processed with MS-DIAL (version 5.3.240719, parameters in Table  S5 ), and AhR activity was predicted with all three approaches. LC/HRMS features were further prioritized to pinpoint potentially persistent compounds (feature intensity change within ± 20% between influent and effluent) or transformation products (at least 50% higher intensity in the effluent compared to the influent). Candidate structures were retrieved with SIRIUS + CSI:FingerID (v5.8.6) and MassBank library (version 2024.11) search. Analytical standards were obtained for zolpidem phenyl-4-carboxylic acid, carbamazepine, and carbamazepine 10,11-epoxide and used to evaluate the tentative structural annotation in addition to AhR activity testing. Further experimental details, alongside data processing and in vitro AhR assay procedure, are given in Text S4. Results and discussion   Data overview   The  MS 2  dataset  (4274) captures the majority of the chemical space of the original dataset (7691) (Fig.  S1 ). Despite extensive efforts to assemble the largest possible collection of MS 2  data for chemicals included in the Tox21 Data Challenge, certain regions of chemical space remain underrepresented. The proportion of active compounds in the  MS 2  dataset  varies from 3% (PPAR.gamma) to 16% (AhR), and closely aligns with the proportions observed in  the original dataset  (Fig.  1 B) . The number of active compounds in the held-out test set ranges from 17 in PPAR.gamma up to 108 in the AhR (Table  S6 ). This is attributed to the overall low proportion of active compounds in the Tox21 dataset, combined with the restriction to compounds for which MS 2  spectra were available and which were not part of the SIRIUS + CSI:FingerID training set. The limited number of active compounds poses challenges for statistically robust evaluation, particularly for assays with a low proportion of active compounds.   To further assess the representativeness of the datasets, pairwise Tanimoto similarities were calculated between all the active compounds and all other compounds (active-active and active-inactive) within the datasets (Fig.  1 C). For instance, in the case of AhR, the similarity distribution of active-active and inactive-active compounds was consistent across datasets; the maximum of active-active similarity distribution in the  original dataset  aligns with the distribution maximum across all datasets. For AR.LBD, a distinct cluster of highly similar active compounds was observed. This cluster corresponds to structurally highly similar steroids and steroid derivatives, which are characterized by fused four-membered ring systems and are well-known AR and AR.LBD agonists [ 40 ]. Nevertheless, for AR.LBD, the active-active similarity distribution does not align across datasets, indicating that the subsets contain more structurally similar active compounds compared to the original dataset. In particular, the  test set  shows a higher proportion of similar compounds, reflected by an increased proportion of compounds with Tanimoto similarity between 0.6 and 0.8 compared to the  original dataset  (Fig.  1 C). This can also be observed for AR.LBD, ER, ER.LBD, and PPAR.gamma (Fig.  S2 ); therefore, while the models were trained for all assays, a fair comparison is feasible only for AhR and AR, where the test set is representative of the   3 K training set .  Molecular network parameter selection and optimization results   The MS 2  spectra of 3413 compounds in the   3 K training set  yielded 5,822,578 pairwise similarity values for each similarity metric, with most values falling below 0.5. The modified cosine similarity and the MS2DeepScore exhibited similar distributions, while the greedy cosine similarity distribution was skewed towards lower values (Fig.  S3 ). The calculated Spearman correlation coefficient between spectral similarity and structure-based Tanimoto similarity was low across all metrics due to the skewed distribution; however, MS2DeepScore achieved the highest  R 2  of 0.38 (Table  S7 ). Still, pairs of compounds with high spectral similarity tended to have high Tanimoto similarity, whereas high Tanimoto similarity could also exhibit low spectral similarity across metrics. This suggests that while high spectral similarity can imply structural similarity, the reverse does not necessarily hold true (Fig.  2 A). One explanation is that some MS 2  spectra may contain limited structural information compared to fingerprints calculated from SMILES, e.g., due to lower spectral quality.   Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   A  Correlation between pairwise structural Tanimoto similarity and pairwise MS 2  similarity (MS2DeepScore) of the same compound.  B  mROC-AUC values depending on the similarity threshold for all the tested MN parameters for the AhR assay.  C  Obtained FPR TPR=0.5  and FPR TPR=0.9  for MN-MS 2  and MN-FP at optimized hyperparameter settings MN hyperparameters — including the type of similarity metric, similarity threshold, voting scheme, and edge filtering strategy — were optimized based on mROC-AUC. Overall, the performance remained consistent regardless of the voting scheme and was slightly influenced by the type of similarity metric (Fig.  2 B, Fig.  S4 ). Nevertheless, a comparison of the three best-performing hyperparameter combinations across assays showed a slight preference for MS2DeepScore, which was therefore selected as the default similarity metric for MN-MS 2  predictions. In addition, MN-MS 2  was evaluated both with edge filtering (retaining the six most similar edges per node) and without limiting the number of edges. Results indicated that edge filtering is beneficial at very low similarity thresholds (£0.2); but overall, higher mROC-AUC values were obtained when all edges above the threshold were retained (Fig.  S5 ). The best-performing similarity threshold varied by assay: 0.3 for Aromatase, 0.4 for AR.LBD, 0.5 for AhR, ER.LBD, and PPAR.gamma, and 0.6 for AR and ER.   The performances of MN-MS 2  and the MN-FP for prioritization of LC/HRMS features in NTS workflows were compared based on FPR TPR=0.5  and FPR TPR=0.9 . The FPR TPR=0.5  was lowest for AR.LBD, with values of 0.06 for MN-MS 2  and 0.01 for MN-FP, likely due to a cluster of highly similar active compounds (Fig.  2 C). Across all assays, MN-FP showed consistently lower FPR TPR=0.5  compared to MN-MS 2 , likely because molecular fingerprints more closely represent structural similarity than MS 2  spectra. The FPR TPR=0.9  was high across all assays for the MN-MS 2 , ranging from 0.67 for AhR to 0.84 for ER (Fig.  2 C, Table  S2 ). The notable increase from FPR TPR=0.5  to FPR TPR=0.9  suggests that identifying the first 50% of active compounds is relatively straightforward, whereas the subsequent 40% exhibit greater similarity to inactive compounds, making them more challenging to distinguish.   While a key advantage of using MN lies in the visualization of complex non-targeted MS datasets and the identification of previously unreported compounds, this strength is most pronounced in structurally homogeneous compound classes [ 41 ,  42 ]. Compounds posing endocrine-disrupting activity are known for complex underlying mechanisms of action, yielding a wide range of compounds showing similar endocrine-disruptive effects [ 43 ,  44 ]. Thus, assessing the endocrine-disrupting activity of unidentified features solely on their MS 2  similarity is insufficient for capturing key scaffolds, attested by the high FPR TPR=0.9  of MN-MS 2  and MN–FP.  Conformal predictions   CP operates on a transformed feature space (reliability domain) and remains unaffected by the unequal distribution of active compounds in different datasets. A transformed feature space is obtained through the underlying algorithm, in this case, RF, in combination with the calibration set [ 45 ]. The CP predictions on the test sets show that, for the most part, the datasets have error rates in agreement with the set error limits (Fig.  S6 ); however, the active class of the ER.LBD test set consistently yielded an error rate exceeding the acceptable limit for all levels of investigated error rates. Furthermore, the efficiency of the models, i.e., providing a single label (active or inactive) prediction, is rather low for significance levels below 0.25 and far below 80% in many cases (Fig.  S6 ). At a significance level of 0.30, most of the models have acceptable efficiencies. The overall low efficiencies at significance levels 0.15 and 0.20 for most assays indicate that information in the MS 2  spectral similarity is insufficient for activity predictions and that additional information is needed to achieve the aforementioned error rates alongside higher predictive capabilities in terms of efficiency. Detailed test set performances are provided in Table  S9 . Comparative evaluation of prediction approaches using the test set   The high FPR TPR=0.9  observed for both MN-MS 2  and MN-FP underscores the inadequacy of relying solely on an unsupervised approach utilizing spectral or structural similarity for annotating compounds potentially posing endocrine-disrupting activity. To investigate this further, the performance of the MN-MS 2  approach was compared with supervised approaches, namely CP, trained on pairwise MS2DeepScore spectral similarity, and MS2Tox models, trained on SIRIUS + CSI:FingerID fingerprints. Given the previously discussed limitations of the test set, the following analysis focuses on the AhR assay. For this assay, 108 active compounds were included in the test set, where active-active and inactive-active similarity distributions align with the ones from the   3 K training set , and exchangeability at all significance levels for CP prediction is guaranteed. Test set results for all approaches and assays can be found in Tables  S8  –  S12 .   The FPR TPR=0.5  for MN-MS 2  and CP resulted in 0.22 and 0.19, respectively. At threshold TPR = 0.9, the FPR values increased for both approaches, though remaining lower for CP (0.82 for MN-MS 2  and 0.68 for CP). In contrast, the FPR TPR=0.5  and FPR TPR=0.9  for the MS2Tox-3K approach were substantially lower, 0.04 and 0.38, respectively (Fig.  3 , Fig.  S7 ). This is likely due to MS 2 -based approaches inadequately capturing structural features relevant to AhR activity.   Fig. 3.     Open in a new tab   Compari