>Methods   Study design   This prospective, observational, multicenter study enrolled patients with HR + /HER2− advanced breast cancer before initiating first-line or subsequent palliative treatment. Hormone receptor-positive status was defined as estrogen-receptor expression with or without progesterone-receptor expression. HER2−negative status was defined as either 0 or 1+ intensity on immunohistochemical (IHC) testing and 2+ intensity on IHC testing with no amplification confirmed by in situ hybridization. All hormone receptor and HER2 assessments were performed at the local pathologies, and the most recently collected tissue from primary or recurrent cancer was used. Pathological and clinical information for this cohort was collected and managed using the secure REDCap electronic data capture tool hosted at the Medical University of Graz 37 , 38 . Blood collection and cfDNA extraction   Blood samples were collected from patients before starting first- to fourth-line of palliative treatment, including 96 samples before first-line therapy (1 L), 52 samples before second-line therapy (2 L), 12 samples before third-line therapy (3 L), and 1 sample before fourth-line therapy (4 L). Thus, 161 plasma samples were collected from 146 patients (Fig.  1 ).   Plasma DNA was isolated, as described previously 18 , 39 . Briefly, 20 mL (range: 10-30 mL) of whole blood was collected into PAXgene Blood ccfDNA Tubes (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) to preserve cell-free DNA (cfDNA). Plasma was separated by centrifugation of the blood samples at 1900 × g for 10 min. The resulting supernatant was carefully transferred and centrifuged at 1900 × g for 10 min to remove any residual cellular debris. Plasma was aliquoted into 2 mL tubes and stored at −80 °C until further processing. cfDNA was extracted from 1 to 4 mL plasma using the QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) or the QIASymphony PAXgene Blood ccfDNA Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasma DNA was quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Life Technologies, Vienna, Austria). mFAST-SeqS   As previously described, the mFAST-SeqS (modified Fast Aneuploidy Screening Test-Sequencing System) assay was used to estimate the tumor fraction in plasma cfDNA. The mFAST-SeqS (modified Fast Aneuploidy Screening Test-Sequencing System) assay detects chromosomal aneuploidy in cfDNA by using a z-score statistical approach to quantify LINE-1 count deviations from a normal chromosomal representation of control samples. A genome-wide z-score (z-score), calculated by summing the squared z-scores of individual chromosome arms, was used as a surrogate marker for tumor fraction. Genome-wide z-scores exceeding ±3 were considered indicative of chromosomal gains or losses 21 . SiMSen-Seq assay forPIK3CA mutation detection   The SiMSen-Seq (SSS) assay was performed as previously described by our group 18 . Briefly, this technology utilizes molecular barcoding of individual DNA template strands, allowing all sequencing reads to be traced back to their original DNA template and correcting for PCR errors introduced during library preparation. For plasma samples, an average of 38.2 ng (range 8.8-103.8 ng) of cfDNA per sample was used for library preparation. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq platform using 150 bp single-end reads, aiming for 10 million reads per sample. Across all interrogated positions, the average unique coverage was 2660× (range: 42–17,227×). Variant allele frequencies (VAFs) are reported as the percentage of alternate reads relative to the total reads at a given position. The detection limit was previously established as a VAF of 0.25%, with at least five consensus reads supporting the mutation 18 . Molecular profiling of plasma samples   Molecular profiling was performed using the AVENIO ctDNA Expanded Kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), which targets 77 cancer-associated genes. We validated the assay in-house and confirmed the manufacturer’s specifications 40 . Library preparation was performed using an average of 40 ng of cfDNA (range: 10–50 ng) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Libraries were quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit and pooled equimolarly. The pooled libraries were further quantified via qPCR and sequenced in batches of four to 16 libraries using 150 bp paired-end reads on an Illumina NextSeq (Mid or High Output kit) or NovaSeq6000 platform (SP flowcell, XP workflow). Sequencing generated an average of 35 million read pairs per sample (range: 12–81 million). After generating consensus reads, the data achieved an average read depth of 3845× (range: 107–28302×), with a median fragment length of 173 bp (range: 159–317 bp). Data analysis was performed using the AVENIO Oncology Analysis Software (version 2.0, Roche) with customized filtration settings for somatic variants. Variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) ≥ 1% in GnomAD v2.1 or listed as common in dbSNP155 were excluded. Additionally, variants with less than 10 mutated reads, variants with VAF below 0.1%, likely germline variants (VAF ∼ 50% and z-score <3), copy number variants, and sequencing artifacts were manually excluded. Filtered variants were annotated using VarSeq (Golden Helix) and classified according to their pathogenicity using OncoKB and/or Franklin (GennoX) 41 . ctDNA levels were assessed as VAF (percentage of sequence reads observed matching a specific DNA variant divided by the overall coverage at that locus). For each sample, we identified the mutation with the highest VAF (hVAF). Statistical analysis   All statistical analyses were performed using R version 4.4.2, Stata (version 18.5), or GraphPad Prism version 10.4.1. Descriptive analyses were conducted to describe patient baseline characteristics. Continuous variables were summarized as medians and interquartile ranges, and categorical variables were reported as counts and percentages. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the detection rates and performance metrics of the SSS and AVENIO assays for  PIK3CA  mutations. Logistic and linear mixed-effects models with random intercepts at the patient level were applied to account for repeated measurements in some patients. Logistic mixed-effects models with patient ID as a random effect were used to evaluate assay concordance, including overall agreement, positive percent agreement (PPA), and negative percent agreement (NPA). Marginal probabilities were estimated, and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated. For continuous outcomes, a linear mixed-effects model was applied. Model parameters were estimated using restricted maximum likelihood (REML), and the significance of fixed effects was assessed using Wald chi-square tests. All statistical tests were two-sided, and  p -values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process   During the preparation of this work, the author(s) used ChatGPT v4 for English editing. After using this tool/service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication. Supplementary information     Supplementary Information  (331.4KB, pdf)    Acknowledgements   This work was supported by Novartis, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo and Pfizer (no grant numbers). and by the Austrian Federal Ministry for Digital and Economic Affairs (Christian Doppler Research Fund for Liquid Biopsies for Early Detection of Cancer). Author contributions   N.Da and M.B. designed and supervised the study. N.Do, R.G., C.B., and L.P. performed plasma preparation and sequencing experiments. E.V.K., C.S., D.E., C.A., R.B., A.M.S., P.J.J., and G.R. contributed to patient care and data acquisition. N.Da and D.H. performed the statistical analysis, N.Da, M.B., and E.H. performed interpretation of results. N.Da, M.B., and E.H. drafted and revised the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript and approved its final version. Data Availability   The BAM files or FASTQ files for the cfDNA samples have been deposited in the EGA archive under accession number EGAS00001008200. Competing interests   M.B. received honoraria from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead, Menarini, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, Stemline, travel funding from BMS, Daiichi Sankyo, MSD, Roche, Pierre Fabre, and research funding from Astra Zeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, and Pfizer. P.J.J. has had a consulting or advisory role, received honoraria, research funding, and/or travel/accommodation expenses from Astra Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Pfizer, Servier, Roche, BMS and Celgene, Pierre Fabre, Janssen/Johnson&Johnson, MSD, Merck, Sanofi/Aventis, Ipsen, Amgen, Cycuria Therapeutics, Vessel. G.R. received honoraria from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead, MSD, Novartis, Roche, Seagen, Stemline, BMS, Consulting or Advisory Role from AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Stemline, and travel support from Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Roche. R.B. received honoraria from Amgen, Astra-Zeneca, BMS, Daichi, Eisai, Eli-Lilly, Gilead, Gruenenthal, MSD, MedMedia, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre-Fabre, Roche, Seagen, Stemline, travel support from Astra-Zeneca, Daiichi, Eli-Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Stemline and Research Support from Daiichi. N.D. received travel/accommodation expenses from Daiichi Sankyo. A.M.S. received honoraria for lectures from AstraZeneca and travel and congress registration support from PharmaMar, MSD, Lilly, AstraZeneca, and Stemline Menarini. D.E. received honoraria from AstraZeneca, Gilead Sciences, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, Roche/Genentech, Novartis, Lilly, Sirius Medical, Menarini Group, Consulting or Advisory Role from AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead Sciences, Novartis, Lilly, Menarini Group, MSD, Roche/Genentech, research funding from Sirius Medical, travel/accommodation expenses from Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, and Menarini Group. E.V.K. received honoraria/travel support from AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Lilly, Gilead, Novartis, Roche, Stemline, and Pierre Fabre. E.H. received unrelated funding from Illumina, Roche, Servier, and PreAnalytiX, and received honoraria from Roche, Astra Zeneca and Incyte for advisory boards, not related to our study. C.S. has received honoraria from Astra-Zeneca, Daichi Sankyo, Eli-Lilly, Gilead, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre-Fabre, Roche, Stemline-Menarini, travel support from Daiichi Sanyo, Eli-Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Roche. All other authors have declared no conflict of interest. Ethical approval   This study was approved by the Austrian ethics committees (approval number 32–415 ex 19/20 for the Medical University of Graz, 1495/2023 for the Medical University of Vienna, and 1164/2022 for the Medical University of Innsbruck). Written informed consent was obtained from all patients. All procedures adhered to the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki and the guidelines for good scientific practice required by the Medical University of Graz. Consent to publication   All contributing authors read and approved the manuscript. Informed consent   All patients provided written informed consent. Footnotes     Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.   These authors contributed equally: Nadia Dandachi, Marija Balic.   Contributor Information   Nadia Dandachi, Email: nadia.dandachi@medunigraz.at.   Marija Balic, Email: balicm@upmc.edu. Supplementary information   The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41523-025-00805-z. References       1. Burstein, H. J. Systemic Therapy for Estrogen Receptor–Positive, HER2−Negative Breast Cancer.  N. Engl. J. Med. 383 , 2557–2570 (2020).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     2. Finn, R. S. et al. Palbociclib and Letrozole in Advanced Breast Cancer.  N. Engl. J. Med. 375 , 1925–1936 (2016).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3. Johnston, S. et al. MONARCH 3 final PFS: a randomized study of abemaciclib as initial therapy for advanced breast cancer.  NPJ Breast Cancer 5 , 5 (2019).   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     4. Hortobagyi, G. N. et al. Overall Survival with Ribociclib plus Letrozole in Advanced Breast Cancer.  N. Engl. J. Med. 386 , 942–950 (2022).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     5. Morrison, L., Loibl, S. & Turner, N. C. The CDK4/6 inhibitor revolution — a game-changing era for breast cancer treatment.  Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 21 , 89–105 (2024).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     6. André, F. et al. Alpelisib plus fulvestrant for PIK3CA-mutated, hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2–negative advanced breast cancer: final overall survival results from SOLAR-1.  Ann. Oncol. 32 , 208–217 (2021).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     7. Turner, N. C. et al. Inavolisib-Based Therapy in PIK3CA-Mutated Advanced Breast Cancer.  N. Engl. J. Med. 391 , 1584–1596 (2024).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     8. Turner, N. C. et al. Capivasertib in Hormone Receptor–Positive Advanced Breast Cancer.  N. Engl. J. Med. 388 , 2058–2070 (2023).   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     9. Bidard, F.-C. et al. Elacestrant (oral selective estrogen receptor degrader) Versus Standard Endocrine Therapy for Estrogen Receptor–Positive, Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2–Negative Advanced Breast Cancer: Results From the Randomized Phase III EMERALD Trial.  J. Clin. Oncol. 40 , 3246–3256 (2022).   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     10. Klocker, E. V. et al. Clinical applications of next-generation sequencing-based ctDNA analyses in breast cancer: defining treatment targets and dynamic changes during disease progression.  Mol. Oncol . 10.1002/1878-0261.13671. (2024).  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ]     11. Ignatiadis, M., Sledge, G. W. & Jeffrey, S. S. Liquid biopsy enters the clinic — implementation issues and future challenges.  Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 18 , 297–312 (2021).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     12. Amato, O., Giannopoulou, N. & Ignatiadis, M. Circulating tumor DNA validity and potential uses in metastatic breast cancer.  Npj Breast Cancer 10 , 21 (2024).   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     13. Heitzer, E., Haque, I. S., Roberts, C. E. S. & Speicher, M. R. Current and future perspectives of liquid biopsies in genomics-driven oncology.  Nat. Rev. Genet 20 , 71–88 (2019).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     14. Turner, N. et al. FGFR1 Amplification Drives Endocrine Therapy Resistance and Is a Therapeutic Target in Breast Cancer.  Cancer Res. 70 , 2085–2094 (2010).   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     15. Condorelli, R. et al. Polyclonal RB1 mutations and acquired resistance to CDK 4/6 inhibitors in patients with metastatic breast cancer.  Ann. Oncol. 29 , 640–645 (2018).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     16. Costa, C. et al. PTEN Loss Mediates Clinical Cross-Resistance to CDK4/6 and PI3Kα Inhibitors in Breast Cancer.  Cancer Discov. 10 , 72–85 (2020).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     17. Turner, N. C. et al. Circulating tumour DNA analysis to direct therapy in advanced breast cancer (plasmaMATCH): a multicentre, multicohort, phase 2a, platform trial.  Lancet Oncol . 10.1016/s1470-2045(20)30444-7. (2020).  [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ]     18. Suppan, C. et al. Sensitive and robust liquid biopsy-based detection of PIK3CA mutations in hormone-receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer patients.  Brit. J. Cancer 126 , 456–463 (2022).   [