>Methods   Plant root exudate collection   The Col-0 accessions (  CS1092 ) were obtained from the lab of Associate Prof. Simona Radutoiu (Dept. of Plant Molecular Biology, Aarhus University). The methodology was designed to refine the process of root exudate collection from over 100 natural accessions, with Col-0 used as the phytometer. To ensure experimental control, plants were divided into seven batches with one Col-0 and one control (a mesh without plant) per batch. Controls were treated identically to plants throughout the experiment, thus serving as baseline references. The experiment was conducted in five replicates, with each replicate consisting of seven batches, mounting to 35 Col-0 phytometers. With synchronized procedures within each batch, we reduced the effects of confounding factors. Sample collection occurred during a specified period to minimize diurnal variations.       Seed sterilization.    The vacuum sterilization procedure described below was adjusted for dealing with many different genotypes. Accessions were surface sterilized using 30 mL of sodium hypochlorite (bleach) and 3 mL of 37% HCl. The reaction between bleach and hydrochloric acid form chlorine gas, which is used to sterilize the seeds in vacuum.   The steps followed in this protocol are described briefly: (1) Open Eppendorf tubes containing seeds were placed in the rack and this setup was transferred to the desiccator. (2) After connecting the vacuum tube, the hypochlorite reaction was started, and the desiccator was closed. A glove can be kept along this setup inside the desiccator to indicate vacuum levels inside the setup. (3) After the vacuum is started, the air inside the desiccator is removed reducing the pressure, thus making the glove indicator expand    39   . Once the glove expands the desiccator valve was closed to shut down the vacuum while the chlorine gas generated in the reaction sterilized the seeds. (4) After 10–15 minutes, desiccator valve was slowly opened to relieve air pressure after which seed vials could be removed. The seeds were taken back to the sterile benches and kept with open lids for 10 minutes to remove any extra sterilization gas.       Plant growth setup.    For  in vitro  cultivation of  Arabidopsis thaliana  accessions, we used half-strength Murashige and Skoog´s medium with Gamborg´s Vitamins (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.8% plant agar (Sigma Aldrich). This nutrient solution was prepared and poured into 90mm Petri dishes containing two compartments (Fisher Scientific).   For ease of handling individual plants of varying sizes due to biological variation, and for creating a “floater” allowing easy root access when sampling in liquid media, an autoclaved plastic mesh was placed in each unique position within the Petri plate. Using a sterile plastic toothpick, two sterilized seeds were placed at the center of each mesh, with one plate having 4-5 unique individual replicates/genotypes (Step 1,  Figure 1 ). After marking the positions of genotypes on the plates, the plates were secured with micropore tape. All these steps were performed under sterile conditions. For vernalization (Step 2,  Figure 1 ), Petri plates were covered in aluminum foil and kept in a cold room (at 4°C) for four days after which they were transferred to growth chambers at 21°C with 16H day. The plates were checked daily, and individual germination dates were noted. Within 2–3 days post germination, the plants were thinned so that only one plant remained within each mesh. The location of the plates was shifted every 2–3 days to minimize position effects. Phenotypic measures including rosette diameter, the number of leaves and extent of chlorosis (  Figure 1 ), could be scored directly on the plates.   Figure 1.  Workflow representing the various steps followed for root exudate collection of  Arabidopsis thaliana  accessions.     Open in a new tab     Sample collection.    Six-week-old plants were gently removed from agar media using sterilized tweezers (Step 3,  Figure 1 ). The transfer of plants from the plates to the sampling solution took approximately 5–6 minutes per plant, depending on the plant sample size. All plants from a plate were treated at a time. Since the plants in our study were small and easy to remove from the agar and clean, this step was relatively quick and straightforward. Handling the mesh instead of the plant minimizes the damage caused to the plant during the transfer. The agar sticking to the root was gently removed with a sterilized paint brush. This step took approximately 2–3 minutes per plant (depending on the size of the plant). Following this, the plants were transferred to individual beakers with a cleaning solution of 400 µL MilliQ waterfor about two minutes (Step 3,  Figure 1 ). This step is recommended for capturing any impertinent exudates due to the initial shock/stress of transferring to liquid media and is also useful in further removal of agar residues from the roots. The plants were then transferred to already prepared sampling vials of 400 µL MilliQ water in 20 mL cylindrical glass vials (27.5 mm diameter x 57 mm height), where the roots were submerged in the solution and the above ground part remained floating, and placed in racks (Step 4,  Figure 1 ). For the sake of sterility, the vial lids were closed, and aeration was prevented. Control treatments were similarly sampled. All these steps were performed inside a flow bench (LaboGene ScanLaf Model Mars). The racks were removed from the flow bench, and the bottom half of the racks was covered in aluminum foil to mimic the dark conditions roots experience in nature. The setup was then transferred to a growth chamber (21°C) for two hours (Step 5,  Figure 1 ). After accounting for each step, the entire process from collection to vial storage takes approximately 133–136 minutes per plant. This includes the two-hour period (120 minutes) for exudate sampling in the growth chamber. During the experiment, up to 60 samples could be handled in one sitting. The growth chamber facility was conveniently located in the same building as the laminar flow chambers, facilitating the transfer of plants between the two environments without prolonged exposure to external environmental conditions. After this, the setup was brought back to the flow benches where the plants were gently removed from the sampling vials (1–2 minutes per vial). The vials were then immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and subsequently stored at -18°C (Step 6,  Figure 1 ). Root exudate analysis   The method for root exudate analysis has been optimized for both targeted and untargeted analysis of root exudates and has a run time of 28 minutes for each sample in negative ionization mode. The details of this method will be discussed in a forthcoming publication from the group but is described briefly below.       Preparation of samples for UHPLC analysis.    Before sample preparation, sample solutions in vials were allowed to thaw at room temperature. An internal standard of ketopinic acid (10µg/mL in MilliQ water) was prepared for spiking the samples. This allows checking for injection efficiency and gauging sample signal strength in LC-MS analysis. 180 µL exudate sample was added to 20 µL of internal standard and filtered using 0.22 μm Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) hydrophobic syringe filters and finally transferred to 2 mL vials with inserts.       HPLC-MS analysis.    The samples were analyzed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC coupled to a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer, qTOF (Bruker, Compact). The column was a Waters Acquity UHPLC HSS T3 column, which had a length of 100 mm and a diameter of 2.1 mm and a particle diameter of 1.8 μm. The column temperature was 45°C. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% acetic acid (AA), in MilliQ-water (eluent A) and 0.1% AA in acetonitrile (eluent B). The flow rate was 0.200 mL min  −1  for the entire analysis, and the injection volume was 2μL. The UHPLC was coupled to the qTOF, through an electrospray ionization (ESI) inlet in the negative ionization mode. Prior to each run, the MS was calibrated using 5 mM sodium acetate solution (HCOONa). Operating settings for the MS were as follows: the capillary voltage was 4.5 kV, the drying gas (N  2 ) was 5.5L min  −1 , the nebulizer pressure was 2.5 bar, the capillary temperature was 200°C, and the scanning interval was 50–1000 m/z. Data were acquired and processed using Bruker software (DataAnalysis) followed by MZmine3 and SIRIUS 5.   The data obtained was first analyzed using the proprietary software  Bruker Compass DataAnalysis  4.3, where background noise levels, signal intensities, signal-to-noise ratios, etc. can be investigated in depth. The open access software  OpenChrom  and  MZmine  are some freely available alternatives for such manual examination of the data.  MZmine  3 is an open-source software for mass-spectrometry data processing, especially from LC-MS data. Peak alignment and noise filtering were carried out with Mzmine3. The noise threshold was estimated as 1.0E  2 , and the minimum feature height threshold to be considered a true signal was kept at least three times the noise level. Applying appropriate filters from control peaks, the chromatogram peaks were then aligned across samples. All the relevant features were further analyzed with  SIRIUS  5 software another open access Java software for analyzing metabolites from tandem mass spectrometry data    40 ,  41   . SIRIUS provides a fragmentation tree to each relevant peak (feature), describing the fragmentation reaction from each molecule from the ESI. The CSI:FingerID feature can then be used to search in molecular structure databases from the internet for tentative identification of compounds    42   .   Notably, SIRIUS 5's natural product classification (NPC) allows clustering of annotated compounds into class, superclass, and pathway categories, which significantly enhances our understanding of the biological interpretations of the metabolites    43   . In the analysis conducted using both positive and negative ionization modes, a higher number of features were identified in the negative mode (379) compared to the positive mode (76). As a result, we will focus on the negative mode results in this context to highlight its capability in detecting and identifying a significant number of compounds    44   . Results   Out of the 35 Col-0 phytometers that were used in the experiment, 28 were successfully sampled for root exudates. The remaining plants either did not survive or were too small to be sampled.  Figure 2  shows the chromatograms obtained from the untargeted analysis in negative ionization mode of Col-0 accessions using the above-described method overlaid over controls (in green). MZmine3 annotated and aligned 378 features/chemical compounds in the 28 Col-0 samples, whereas the 10 random controls consisted of 68 features (see  Underlying data     45   ). After subtracting the features present in controls, we identified 354 metabolic features present only in Col-0 accessions (see Supplementary Table 1 in  Extended data     45   ). The CSI:FingerID web service feature of SIRIUS 5 classified 254 compounds (around 71% of the annotated features) in the samples. Their chemical annotations are listed in Supplementary Table 2 (see  Extended data     45   ). It should be noted that the features here are categorized as 'Confidence Level 3'    41    indicating that while the metabolites have been annotated, they have not been individually confirmed via reference standards.   Figure 2.  Representative chromatograms of two different Col-0 accessions (m/z 121–832, rt 0.99–15 minutes) obtained from root exudates overlaid over blank samples by UHPLC/ESI-QTOFMS in negative mode.     Open in a new tab Using the phenotypic data collected during the experiment (number of leaves and rosette size of plants at the time of sampling), we observed a clear correlation between plant size and total peak area (  see Extended data analysis ) validating the ability of the methodology to accurately capture and quantify differences in compound abundance    46 ,  47   . We also estimated the coefficient of variation (CV) and mean abundance for the detected compounds (  see Supplementary Table 1 ). We then calculated the relationship between CV and mean abundance based on the Poisson distribution, as suggested by Ipsen and Ebbels    48   , and found it to be in line with the predicted relationship for LCMS data (  see Extended data analysis ). Discussion   Root exudates are substantially hard to study, yet the importance of root-secreted signaling chemicals in mediating plant interactions is no longer debatable. So far, the methodologies available to trap and identify root-secreted signaling chemicals have remained a serious problem    49   . This has limited our ability to identify any patterns of their natural variation on a large sample of accessions, and thus, their role in driving belowground communications remains to be elucidated.   The method developed here was tuned for large-scale root exudate sampling of  A. thaliana , natural accessions. With this method, by reducing the time of collection and omitting orbital shaking, we aimed to diminish the shock effects experienced by plants during transfer from solid to liquid media. Furthermore, faster chemical analysis time is another significant improvement when handling hundreds of samples. Even with minute sampling solutions, the method yielded sufficient signals for the LCMS analysis, which was sensitive enough to capture microquantities of several metabolites, considering the sample sizes (  i.e., smaller plants showed smaller total peak areas, while larger plants exhibited larger total peak areas). This is further supported by the number of secondary metabolites potentially identified in the analysis. Assessment of reproducibility of the detected compounds through the coefficient of variation (CV) and mean abundance of detected compounds, further validates the robustness and reliability of our approach. Moreover, SIRIUS 5 was able to annotate a substantial number of features (listed in Supplementary Table 2 in  Extended data     45   ), and this information can be used to draw broad patterns and make inferential hypotheses to be validated by complementary approaches. Our method is valuable for quick pattern assessment experiments of large samples of accessions for the purpose of studying plant-environment interactions (including but not limited to plant-microbes, plant-insects, and plant-plants).   Even though hydroponic root exudate collection is not a perfect solution, as we cannot fully mimic the conditions roots may experience in nature, and there can be potential variations in the exudate profiles derived from hydroponic  vs . soil environments    12   , these methods are still highly useful setups that allow capturing exudates in sterile environments    13   . In this method, using a cost-effective plastic floater, plants were easily managed during the entire growth and hydroponic sampling steps. Furthermore, this floating setup could be translated into longer temporal collection experiments, as in similar experiments conducted on  A. thaliana     19 ,  24   . Using meshes of different pore sizes, one can customise this setup for root exudate collection and analysis of several individual genotypes from other plant species.   Verifying the biochemical functions of these metabolites is without a doubt, a mammoth feat, requiring an interdisciplinary approach. Analyzing root exudates in axenic conditions gives a broad overview of their chemical composition, and they can be further validated for their roles using complementary methodologies spanning multiple disciplines. For example, compounds tentatively identified by SIRIUS 5, can be quantified using a targeted approach if authentic standards are available. Many root exudate studies have previously confirmed an altered pattern of root behavior once their ability to sense the exudates of neighboring plants is removed    3   . Targeting specific components of exudates for validating this behavior could also present an interesting next step. Deep investigation into the biochemical pathways of these metabolites by creating gene knockouts could also reveal their exact roles in plant behavior modulation. As a preliminary validation step, we successfully confirmed the accuracy of SIRIUS5 within our team by targeting the identification and quantification of standards, such as ketopinic acid, tryptophan and cyclic GMP, for a subset of samples analyzed in this study    50   .   Studying root exudate chemical signals mediating belowground interactions are important not only from an ecological context but also from an applied perspective in agriculture and forestry    1   . Root-secreted compounds are part of a complex interaction network incorporating other inter/intraspecific neighbors, bacteria, fungi and invertebrates etc., where each interacting plant might receive individual signals from multiple sources, making this exceedingly difficult to dissect. Hence, methodologies are needed to first simplify studying these interactions and identify ecologically relevant biochemical communication channels    51   , which can be ultimately applied in agricultural context    1   . Scrutinizing the variation in chemical profiles of interacting partners remains an essential first step, which has been largely overlooked in root exudate studies    13   , further hindered by following a targeted approach to identify already known compounds.   The method developed here takes a step forward in overcoming limitations of previously developed hydroponic systems. By developing an easy-to-manage setup for largescale sampling, we detected many interesting secondary metabolites in Col-0, which will be used for further investigations using population genomics, evolutionary ecology and analytical chemistry approaches to answer questions relating to their roles in plant-environment interactions. Ethics and consent   Ethical approval and consent were not required. Funding Statement   This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 101029678.     The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.   [version 3; peer review: 2 approved, 1 approved with reservations] Data availability   Underlying data   Zenodo: Unraveling the secrets of plant roots: Simplified method for large scale root exudate sampling and analysis in Arabidopsis thaliana.  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8004460     45   .   This project contains the following underlying data:     -  Raw datafiles.xlsx: The raw datasets obtained from MZmine 3 analysis, which contains aligned features of Columbia genotypes (Sheet1) as well as control samples (Sheet2). The dataset consists of  feature (row)ID, average (mass-to-charge ratios) m/z  and  retention times (RT)  across samples for individual features. It also includes sample-specific information including  feature status, name, m/z, RT, feature peak height,  and  area . We also include a filtered datasheet excluding the features obtained in control as well as samples (Sheet3). Sheet 4 contains the phenotypic data on the number of leaves and rosette size of the 28 replicates at the time of sampling, along with the total peak area for each sample from MZmine data.   Extended data   Zenodo: Unraveling the secrets of plant roots: Simplified method for large scale root exudate sampling and analysis in Arabidopsis thaliana.  https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8004460     45   .   This project contains the following extended data:     -  Supplementary tables-.xlsx: The 354 metabolites obtained after filtering out control features are listed with their  mass-to-charge ratios ,  retention times, and the mean, variance and coefficient of variation of the peak areas (Supplementary Table 1). Supplementary Table 2 details the features annotated by SIRIUS 5with their  mass-to-charge ratios, retention times, chemical formula, chemical annotations,  and corresponding  probabilities scored by SIRIUS  Extended data analysis: Contains supporting data analysis for reproducibility and validity of our method for root exudate collection and analysis in  Arabidopsis thaliana.  These extended data analyses enhance the understanding of the relationship between plant phenotypic traits, peak area, and variation in compound abundance     Data are available under the terms of the  Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license  (CC-BY 4.0). Acknowledgments   We would firstly like to thank Dr. Xavier Picó (CSIC, Spain) for providing the accessions used in developing this methodology. We would also like to thank Plant Molecular Biology group members, especially Dr. Alen Trgovcevic and Raffaella De Masi for their valuable insights on  in vitro  cultivation of  Arabidopsis thaliana  plants. We would additionally like to thank research group members at Dep. of Chemistry, especially Master’s students Antigoni Christofili, Jeppe Clemmensen and Jonas Dahl Dueholm and for all their help with sample preparation and chemical analysis. We also would like to thank Dr. Thomas Bataillon for all his help with the data reproducibility analysis. References       1.  Wang NQ, Kong CH, Wang P, et al. : Root exudate signals in plant–plant interactions.   Plant Cell Environ.   2021;44(4):1044–1058. 10.1111/pce.13892   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     2.  Subrahmaniam HJ, Libourel C, Journet EP, et al. : The genetics underlying natural variation of plant–plant interactions, a beloved but forgotten member of the family of biotic interactions.   Plant J.   2018;93(4):747–770. 10.1111/tpj.13799   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [