>Methods   Study design   ABCSG-52/ATHENE is a multicenter open-label, two-arm, randomized, single-stage phase 2 study (Fig.  1 ). Registration of the study in the European Union Clinical Trials Register was performed before the inclusion of the first patient (EudraCT no. 2019-002364-27). The study protocol was reviewed and approved by an independent ethics committee (Ethics Committee of the County of Salzburg, Austria). The first patient was enrolled on 3 July 2020, and the last patient was enrolled on 2 December 2021. The full study protocol is provided in  Supplementary Information . The study design and conduct complied with all relevant regulations regarding the use of human study participants. The study was conducted in accordance with the criteria set by the Declaration of Helsinki. The CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) guidelines were followed 45 . Randomization, power calculation and statistical tests comply with the ICMJE (International Committee of Medical Journal Editors) guidelines on reporting. Patients   Patients with previously untreated, histologically confirmed HER2-positive EBC with a clinical prognostic stage of cT1c to cT4a–d, N0–3 and M0, with adequate cardiac (ejection fraction ≥55%), renal, liver and bone marrow function were eligible for this trial. Patients with a history of malignancies other than nonmelanoma skin cancer and in situ carcinomas and those with a history of autoimmune disease, bilateral breast cancer or other concomitant serious medical conditions were excluded from trial participation. All patients signed an informed consent form before study enrollment. Patients were not compensated for clinical trial participation. Randomization and masking   Patients were randomized 1:1 to two 3-weekly cycles of a chemotherapy-free induction phase (part 1) with TP-A or TP alone. Thereafter, all patients received four cycles of TP-A in combination with epirubicin (part 2). Randomization was done with a centralized web-based system using a minimization algorithm including the three stratification criteria: (1) baseline stromal TILs: <5% versus ≥5%; (2) HR status: HR positive versus HR negative; and (3) prognostic stage: ≤IIA versus ≥IIB (according to the clinical prognostic stage groups defined by the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging manual version 8.0). PD-L1 expression status was neither an inclusion nor a stratification factor. Procedure   Study treatment   In the ABCSG-52/ATHENE study, treatment consisted of two parts. For part 1, both treatment groups received two 3-weekly cycles of pertuzumab (starting with 840 mg administered intravenously (IV) on cycle 1, followed by 420 mg IV for the subsequent cycles) and trastuzumab (starting with 600 mg administered subcutaneously (SC) or 8 mg kg −1  IV on cycle 1, followed by 600 mg SC or 6 mg kg −1  IV for the subsequent cycles). In the TP-A group, two 3-weekly cycles of atezolizumab (1,200 mg IV per cycle) were added.   For part 2, both groups received four 3-weekly cycles of atezolizumab (1,200 mg IV per cycle), pertuzumab (420 mg IV per cycle), trastuzumab (600 mg SC or 6 mg kg −1  IV per cycle) and epirubicin (90 mg m −2  per cycle).   Adjuvant treatment was not part of our neoadjuvant trial. If pCR was not achieved, a taxane-based adjuvant chemotherapy was recommended. After the completion of adjuvant standard anti-HER2 therapy and in the case of HR-positive patients, standard endocrine therapy was recommended. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes   TILs in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues from diagnostic biopsies performed before treatment initiation were assessed by a breast cancer pathologist. Stromal TILs were counted according to the recommendation of the International TIL Working Group 46 . PD-L1 expression   The expression of PD-L1 was assessed in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues from diagnostic biopsies performed before the start of treatment. For PD-L1 staining, the Ventana PD-L1 SP124 assay was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol (no dilution was required). PD-L1 positivity was defined as at least 1% PD-L1-expressing tumor-infiltrating immune cells 47 . Outcome parameters   The primary outcome was efficacy with regard to pCR (ypT0/is, ypN0), which was assessed in the overall study population at the time of surgery. This assessment was performed locally at each site.   The secondary outcomes were RCB and overall response rate, which were both assessed in the overall study population at the time of surgery.   Safety control   AEs were assessed and coded according to Common Terminology Criteria for AEs version 5.0. In addition, a strict, continuous safety monitoring program was designed, and the proportion of patients with at least one grade ≥3 AE of special interest, including immune-related AEs, cardiac disorders and/or infusion-related reactions (see Supplementary Table  1  for detailed definitions), was closely monitored. Prespecified Pocock-type boundaries were implemented 48 , and a proportion of 20% was considered safe. The sequential boundaries were calculated such that the trial would have been stopped early with a 5% probability in case the true rate of grade ≥3 AEs of special interest was as high as 20%. Data on AEs were collected until the postsurgery visit (within 7–42 days after surgery but at least 42 days after the last dose of neoadjuvant study treatment).   Echocardiography was required at screening (within 28 days before randomization), before the first administration of epirubicin and before surgery. Additional assessments were performed as clinically indicated. At screening, patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction of <55% were not eligible for study participation. During treatment, patients whose left ventricular ejection fraction decreased to <50% had to permanently discontinue the study treatment. Statistical analysis   Sample size assumptions were based on the pCR data reported in the NeoSphere trial 10  as well as statistical and medical expert opinions. A pCR proportion of 40% in the overall study population was assumed to indicate relevant clinical activity of this regimen, and the main goal of this trial was to estimate the true pCR proportion with a given level of precision (that is, half-width of 95% CI = 13 percentage points). With these assumptions, a sample size of 55 patients would have been required. However, given that CIs are the widest when the point estimate is 50%, the sample size calculation was based on an assumed pCR rate of 50% and yielded 57 patients. Owing to 1:1 randomization, 58 patients were randomized to achieve a balance between arms. However, the study was considered positive if at least 40% of the ITT population achieved pCR.   The primary endpoint, pCR, was assessed in the full analysis set consisting of all randomized patients. Patients were analyzed according to the ITT principle. The secondary endpoints, RCB 49  and overall response rate 50  at surgery, were assessed in all patients with a nonmissing measurement (modified ITT). Furthermore, efficacy endpoints were reanalyzed in the efficacy assessment population, which consisted of all patients who received at least two cycles of the study treatment and were assessable for pCR status.   Safety analyses were conducted based on the safety population, which comprised all patients who received at least one dose of study treatments.   Wilson score 95% CIs were derived for the primary and secondary outcomes, and 95% Wald asymptotic CIs for treatment arm differences were derived. In addition, univariable logistic regression models were used to assess potential associations of clinical covariates with pCR. Covariates used included TIL proportion, HR status, prognostic stage, age, BMI, grade, menopausal status, histological type and PD-L1 status. All indicated  P  values (Wald tests) are two-sided. No multiplicity adjustments were used.   A nonpredefined exploratory analysis of pCR rate according to PD-L1 status was conducted in the ITT population with available PD-L1 data.   Analyses were performed using SAS software version 9.4 (SAS Institute).   As the trial start coincided with the COVID-19 outbreak in 2020, site initiations were evaluated in close consultation with the trial sites and according to available resources and local circumstances. Because of an increase in the number of infections (following the peak of the COVID-19 outbreak in Austria in the spring of 2020), an evaluation of the benefit–risk balance was performed in cooperation with the ABCSG-52/ATHENE coordinating investigators and in consultation with the investigational medicinal product provider (Roche), and the results were shared with the trial site teams. According to this guidance, study conduct (including enrollment and study treatment) was continued per protocol considering site-specific and/or countrywide COVID-19 government measures and guidance documents (for example, from the Austrian Ministry of Health). Reporting summary   Further information on research design is available in the  Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary  linked to this article. Supplementary information     Supplementary Information  (1.5MB, pdf)  CONSORT 2010 checklist and protocol version 1.0.     Reporting Summary  (7.2MB, pdf)      Supplementary Tables  (27.3KB, xlsx)  Supplementary Tables 1–6.   Acknowledgements   This research project was partially supported by Roche Austria GmbH. The funders agreed with the initial study design question but had no role in the detailed study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. Author contributions   G.R. and R.B. contributed to the literature search. G.R., D.H. and L.S. contributed to the figures. G.R., R.B., M.B., V.B.-R., S.P.G., M.K., F.P., D.H., L.S., N.Z., M. Gnant and R.G. contributed to the study design. Z.B.-H., M.F. and N.Z. contributed to the resources. G.R., R.B., C.A.S., A.P., M.B., E.P., U.D., C.F.S., S.P.G., K.S., C.B., M. Gili, M.R., V.W., C.A., L.W., M.M., B.S., R.P. and R.G. contributed to the data collection. G.R., D.E., R.B., S.P.G., K.S., D.H., L.S., Z.B.-H., M.F., M. Gnant and R.G. contributed to the data analysis and interpretation. G.R., D.E., Z.B.-H., M.F., M. Gnant and R.G. contributed to the assessment and verification of data. All authors contributed to the writing of the paper. Peer review   Peer review information   Nature Cancer  thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Data availability   The individual clinical data, including source data, cannot be made publicly available owing to patient privacy. The individual deidentified clinical data and—if needed—statistical analysis plan as well as a data definition table file can be shared only upon approval of the analysis proposal by the steering committee and sponsor of the ABCSG-52 study and after a data-sharing agreement has been signed. Initial requests will be addressed within 6 weeks by the sponsor. Data availability after approval of the respective analysis proposal and signatory of the data-sharing agreement will depend on the analysis to be performed and agreed upon upfront in the data-sharing agreement but in no case less than 4 weeks. Please contact the corresponding author for more information. The study protocol is available in  Supplementary Information . Code availability   The SAS program code can be shared upon approval of the analysis proposal by the steering committee and sponsor of the ABCSG-52 study and after a data-sharing agreement has been signed. Please contact the corresponding author for more information. Competing interests   G.R. reports disclosures related to consulting fees (Amgen, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Stemline), payment/honoraria (Amgen, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, Stemline, BMS) and travel/accommodations/expenses (Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead, Merck, Pfizer, Roche). D.E. reports disclosures related to consulting fees (AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Lilly, Menarini, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, Sirius Medical), payment/honoraria (AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, Sirius Medical), expert testimony (AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Lilly), travel/accommodations/expenses (AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer), an advisory role (AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo) and receipt of equipment/materials from Sirius Medical. R.B. reports disclosures related to grants/contracts (Daiichi Sankyo), consulting fees (AstraZeneca, Daiichi, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Gilead, Gruenenthal, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Seagen, Stemline), payment/honoraria (AstraZeneca, BMS, Daiichi, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Gilead, Gruenenthal, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Seagen), travel/accommodations/expenses (Daiichi, MSD, Pfizer) and an advisory role (WSG). C.A.S. reports disclosures related to support for the paper (Roche), grants/contracts (Roche), payment/honoraria (Roche) and travel/accommodations/expenses (Roche). A.P. reports disclosures related to payments for an advisory role (Novartis, Amgen, Celgene/BMS, Sandoz, Janssen, AstraZeneca, Abbvie, Takeda, Sanofi, Kite–Gilead, Roche, Pfizer, Seagen, Daiichi Sankyo) and travel/accommodations/expenses (Roche, Gilead, Daiichi Sankyo, Janssen, Eli Lilly, Pierre Fabre). M.B. reports disclosures related to grants/contracts (Amgen, AstraZeneca, Cepheid, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, MSD, Novartis, Seagen), consulting fees (Amgen, AstraZeneca, Celgene, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Roche, Samsung, Gilead, Seagen), payment/honoraria (Amgen, AstraZeneca, Celgene, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Roche, Seagen, Gilead), travel/accommodations/expenses (AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, MSD, Roche), an advisory role (Pfizer, GBG, Novartis) and a leadership/fiduciary role (OeGHO, ABCSG). E.P. reports disclosures related to support for the paper (Roche), payment/honoraria (Roche) and an advisory role (Roche). C.F.S. reports disclosures related to grants/contracts (Amgen, Roche, AstraZeneca, Daiichi), consulting fees (AstraZeneca, Novartis), payment/honoraria (Novartis, AstraZeneca, Daiichi, Seagen, Amgen), travel/accommodations/expenses (Daiichi) and an advisory role (WSG). S.P.G. reports disclosures related to consulting fees (Roche), payment/honoraria (Roche), travel/accommodations/expenses (Roche) and an advisory role (Roche). M.K. reports disclosures related to an advisory role (WSG). D.H. reports disclosures related to support for the paper (Roche). L.S. reports disclosures related to support for the paper (Roche). Z.B.-H. reports disclosures related to consulting fees (AstraZeneca, Menarini Stemline, MSD) and payment/honoraria (AstraZeneca, MSD). M. Gili reports disclosures related to support for the paper (Roche). L.W. reports disclosures related to payment/honoraria (Roche Austria) and travel/accommodations/expenses (Roche Austria). M.M. reports disclosures related to consulting fees (Roche, Eli Lilly, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, MSD), payment/honoraria (MedMedia, Roche, Eli Lilly, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, MS), travel/accommodations/expenses (Amgen, Roche, Novartis, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai), an advisory role (Eli Lilly, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, MSD) and receipt of equipment/materials (AstraZeneca, Astellas). B.S. reports disclosures related to travel/accommodations/expenses (Roche Austria). R.P. reports disclosures related to payment/honoraria (Myriad, Roche, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, MedMedia), travel/accommodations/expenses (Pfizer, Novartis) and an advisory role (Novartis, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Roche). M. Gnant reports disclosures related to consulting fees (AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Menarini Stemline, MSD, Novartis), payment/honoraria (Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, EPG Health (IQVIA), Menarini Stemline, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Veracyte), expert testimony payment (Eli Lilly), travel/accommodations/expenses (Eli Lilly, Menarini Stemline, Novartis, Pierre Fabre) and an advisory role (AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly); an immediate family member is employed by Sandoz. R.G. reports disclosures related to consulting fees (Celgene, Novartis, Roche, BMS, Takeda, Abbvie, AstraZeneca, Janssen, MSD, Amgen, Merck, Gilead, Daiichi Sankyo, Sanofi), payment/honoraria (Celgene, Roche, Merck, Takeda, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Amgen, BMS, MSD, Sandoz, Abbvie, Gilead, Daiichi Sankyo, Sanofi), travel/accommodations/expenses (Roche, Amgen, Janssen, AstraZeneca, Novartis, MSD, Celgene, Gilead, BMS, Abbvie, Daiichi Sankyo), an advisory role (Celgene, Novartis, Roche, BMS, Takeda, Abbvie, AstraZeneca, Janssen, MSD, Amgen, Merck, Gilead, Daiichi Sankyo, Sanofi) and stock/stock options (Novo Nordisk, Lilly). The other authors declare no competing interests. Footnotes     Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.   These authors contributed equally: Gabriel Rinnerthaler, Daniel Egle, Michael Gnant, Richard Greil.   Supplementary information   The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s43018-024-00890-2. References       1. Cortazar, P. et al. Pathological complete response and long-term clinical benefit in breast cancer: the CTNeoBC pooled analysis.  Lancet 384 , 164–172 (2014).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     2. Cardoso, F. et al. Early breast cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up.  Ann. Oncol. 30 , 1194–1220 (2019).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     3. National Comprehensive Cancer Network.  Breast Cancer (Version 4.2023) www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/breast.pdf  (2023).       4. Korde, L. A. et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, and targeted therapy for breast cancer: ASCO guideline.  J. Clin. Oncol. 39 , 1485–1505 (2021).   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     5. Hurvitz, S. A. et al. Neoadjuvant trastuzumab, pertuzumab, and chemotherapy versus trastuzumab emtansine plus pertuzumab in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer (KRISTINE): a randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trial.  Lancet Oncol. 19 , 115–126 (2018).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     6. Schneeweiss, A. et al. Pertuzumab plus trastuzumab in combination with standard neoadjuvant anthracycline-containing and anthracycline-free chemotherapy regimens in patients with HER2-positive early breast cancer: a randomized phase II cardiac safety study (TRYPHAENA).  Ann. Oncol. 24 , 2278–2284 (2013).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     7. Swain, S. M. et al. Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and standard anthracycline- and taxane-based chemotherapy for the neoadjuvant treatment of patients with HER2-positive localized breast cancer (BERENICE): a phase II, open-label, multicenter, multinational cardiac safety study.  Ann. Oncol. 29 , 646–653 (2018).   [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     8. von Minckwitz, G. et al. Trastuzumab emtansine for residual invasive HER2-positive breast cancer.  N. Engl. J. Med. 380 , 617–628 (2019).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     9. File, D., Curigliano, G. & Carey, L. A. Escalating and de-escalating therapy for early-stage HER2-positive breast cancer.  Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol. Educ. Book 40 , 1–11 (2020).   [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ]     10. Gianni, L. et al. Efficacy and safety of neoadjuvant pertuzumab and trastuzumab in women with locally advanced, inflammatory, or early HER2-positive breast cancer (NeoSphere): a randomised multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial.  Lancet Oncol. 13 , 25–32 (2012).   [ DOI ] [