>METHODS   Structural model   The structural model is based on the previously developed IGID model framework   20    and consists of four submodels: (1) IGI; (2) IGRH; (3) renal glucose reabsorption; and (4) dapagliflozin PKs. The IGI submodel, initially designed to describe glucose‐insulin homeostasis within a single quantitative framework using bidirectional feedback, was introduced to quantify treatment‐mediated short‐term responses of plasma glucose and insulin. The IGRH submodel was used for the long‐term predictions of dapagliflozin efficacy, expressed in HbA1c %, as a function of average daily blood glucose levels and the life cycle of red blood cells and their progenitors. Dapagliflozin's pharmacodynamic effect, directly associated with the dapagliflozin PK submodel, was introduced in the renal glucose reabsorption submodel as a competitive process where the drug competes with glucose for SGLT2 and type 1 sodium‐glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) binding in the S1/S2 and S3 renal tubule compartments, respectively.   Significant discrepancies between T2DM and T1DM are limited to alterations in the IGI part of the system. The most distinctive feature of T1DM is the loss of insulin‐secreting function,   21    which provides a strong rationale to exclude insulin production with the associated glycemic control from the model. To compensate for the lack of endogenous insulin secretion and avoid chronic hyperglycemia, patients with T1DM are treated with exogenous insulins. In the model, this is reflected through the introduction of multiple PK models for various types of insulins: rapid‐acting insulins, including aspart, lispro, regular insulins 100 and 500, glulisine, and neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH), as well as long‐acting insulin analogs, namely glargine and detemir.   The published one‐compartment PK models for aspart,   22    lispro, regular insulins 100 and 500, NPH, and glargine were integrated.   23    Aspart and lispro PK models describe the absorption of both soluble insulin and protamine mixtures through a set of transit compartments or combined first‐order and zero‐order absorption, respectively. The combined absorption model was also used for insulin glargine. Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion was emulated using the aspart PK model by replacing the bolus injection with infusion over time. Concentrations of regular and NPH insulins are described using a model with first‐order absorption and lag time in case of the latter. The covariates are body weight on volume of distribution and/or clearance, as well as dose affecting bioavailability, absorption, or clearance. The glulisine and detemir PK models were designed de novo, also as one‐compartment structures.   Following the implementation of the aforementioned PK models, endogenous insulin concentration in plasma was replaced with the exogenous insulins, with the glucose elimination rate now directly dependent on the concentration of insulin in the central compartment of the respective PK models without delays.   Subsequent changes in the IGI submodel are related to the glucose production rate. The modulation function governing endogenous glucose production during overnight fasting was considered to be specific to T2DM and excluded from the T1DM model.   24    In turn, an additional feedback compartment was introduced to account for the increased gluconeogenesis after exogenous insulin administration in T1DM. This feedback follows the dynamics of the plasma insulin with a delay and allows to describe the short‐term plasma glucose recovery after the administration of various mixtures of insulin aspart and lispro. The delay and magnitude of the insulin feedback effect on glucose production were associated with the protamine fraction, with soluble insulins achieving greater potentiation of gluconeogenesis but slower onset of the effect than the high‐protamine mixtures. Likewise, insulin‐dependent glucose elimination was slower for the protamine‐rich solutions.   The final IGID‐T1DM model includes 62 ordinary differential equations. A schematic representation of the model is provided in Figure  1 . All model equations are provided in the Appendix  S1 ; all parameter values are listed in Table  S1 .   FIGURE 1.     Open in a new tab   Schematic representation of the T1DM platform model, enhanced with PK models of exogenous insulins acting on the insulin‐dependent glucose clearance. The dapagliflozin PK, integrated glucose‐insulin, and renal models (blue, yellow, and green areas) were adapted, respectively, from Melin et al.,   14    Jauslin et al.,   17    and Yakovleva et al.   15   ; the integrated glucose‐RBC‐HbA1c model (red area) was adapted from Lledó‐García et al.   19    GFR, glomerular filtration rate; Hb, hemoglobin; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin; Ki SGLT1 , affinity of an inhibitor to SGLT1; Ki SGLT2 , affinity of an inhibitor to SGLT2; NPH, neutral protamine Hagedorn; PK, pharmacokinetics; Q bladder , flow rate to the bladder from the S3 segment; Q lumen , flow rate between renal tubule segments; Q urine , flow rate of urine from the bladder; RBC, red blood cell; SGLT1, type 1 sodium‐glucose cotransporter; SGLT2, type 2 sodium‐glucose cotransporter; T1DM, type 1 diabetes mellitus; UGE, urinary glucose excretion. Data   Insulin PKs and short‐term glucose response data   Insulin PK data from adult healthy volunteers or subjects with T1DM were collected for seven types of commonly used insulins through systematic literature search and digitization. The data on aspart (6 sources   25   ,    26   ,    27   ,    28   ,    29   ,    30   ), lispro (7 sources   26   ,    31   ,    32   ,    33   ,    34   ,    35   ,    36   ), glargine (2 sources   37   ,    38   ), and regular/NPH insulins (3 sources   32   ,    37   ,    38   ) were used to validate the published PK models, integrated into the T1DM platform. Glulisine (1 source   39   ) and detemir (2 sources   40   ,    41   ) data were used in the development of the respective PK models, because no simple empirical PK model was publicly available for these two products. For lispro and aspart insulin, data were available for both soluble formulations and different protamine mixtures; continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion data were available for aspart. Short‐term glucose response data were collected under aspart and lispro insulin treatment with different protamine fractions (3 sources   27   ,    28   ,    35   ) and were subsequently used to identify the parameters of insulin feedback on glucose production. Long‐term glucose and HbA1c response data   Individual glucose and HbA1c data from two phase III studies in patients with T1DM, treated with dapagliflozin, were included in the model validation:  NCT02268214   42    and  NCT02460978 .   43    Patients received either a placebo or dapagliflozin 5 or 10 mg once daily as an add‐on therapy to insulin for a 24‐week short‐term treatment period, followed by a 28‐week long‐term subject‐ and site‐blinded treatment period. Throughout the study (from the beginning of the lead‐in period to the end of the long‐term treatment period), the insulin dose was adjusted consistent with good medical practice, according to self‐measured blood glucose readings, local guidance, and individual circumstances. Patients were not allowed to change their insulin administration methods during the study period except during replacements of insulin pumps.   Pharmacodynamic data from the  NCT02268214  and  NCT02460978  dapagliflozin clinical trials were used to validate long‐term responses in glycemic control (i.e., average plasma glucose at weeks 12 and 24 and HbA1c at weeks 4, 8, 12, 18, and 24), as predicted with the IGID‐T1DM model considering the adjustment of the total daily insulin dose over the treatment period. Model development   Adaptation of the T2DM modeling platform to describe the T1DM condition was performed sequentially. At the first step, differential equations reflecting endogenous insulin dynamics in plasma and effect compartment were removed and replaced by PK models for seven different types of insulin. Consequently, the endogenous insulin in the insulin‐dependent glucose elimination rate was replaced with the sum of exogenous insulin concentrations.   At the second step, the parameters of the insulin‐driven feedback on glucose production rate were estimated based on the aspart and lispro PK data with different protamine fractions (9 time series in total), and corresponding plasma glucose measurements made within 12 h after insulin dose administration. To achieve the best description of the plasma insulin concentration after lispro and aspart administration with different protamine fractions and to remove potential bias from the limitations of the generalized PK models, each PK curve was described by a unique set of parameters, mimicking the forcing function approach. Meal size and meal composition were adapted from the corresponding publications; however, to allow an additional degree of flexibility, a scalar parameter (representing the conversion of a meal in kcal to the model input) and the absorption rate from the gut were estimated. Because aspart and lispro administration was preceded with unknown doses of other insulins, 18‐h regular 100 insulin infusion was simulated with an estimated dose to achieve the glucose level matching with the starting point of the glucose observations, as baseline glucose values cannot be represented as the initial conditions (i.e., steady‐state) of the system that is constantly perturbed by meals and insulin doses. Finally, various structural models were evaluated, incorporating protamine fraction as a factor influencing either the magnitude of the insulin feedback or delay, or both.   Model selection was based on the following complex criterion: the difference in objective function value (−2 log‐likelihood) or Akaike information criterion between the nested or non‐nested models should exceed −3.84 or 0, respectively; relative standard errors (RSEs) of the estimated parameters calculated from the Fisher information matrix should not exceed 50%; goodness‐of‐fit plots should provide an unbiased description of the data; multi‐start parameter optimization procedure within the wide range of initial parameter values should result in the matching point estimates for most of the test runs.   Model development, analysis, validation, and forward simulations were performed using Monolix software (version 2020R1; Lixoft, France) and R software (version 4.0.2; R Project,  www.r‐project.org ). Model validation and forward simulations   First, PK profiles of aspart, lispro, regular insulin/NPH, and glargine were reproduced based on the integrated published PK models and compared with the observed data. Second, model validation was performed by predicting long‐term glucose and HbA1c response for dapagliflozin phase III trials  NCT02268214  and  NCT02460978 . Because individual information on daily food consumption, particular types of insulin administration, and times of insulin administration was not registered during the trials, a generalized scenario was proposed, with the 40 U total daily insulin dose being divided in a 60:40 ratio between the single morning dose of insulin glargine as basal insulin and 75%/25% soluble‐to‐protamine mixture of insulin aspart as bolus insulin given twice daily simultaneously with a meal equivalent of 165 g of glucose at 4 and 8 h after glargine administration. The changes in total insulin dose were measured at weeks 2, 12, and 24 and those measurements were incorporated into the simulations as a time‐dependent stepwise function modifying the doses of all insulins. The observed changes in average daily plasma glucose and changes in HbA1c were compared with model‐predicted values under treatment with placebo, dapagliflozin 5 mg, or dapagliflozin 10 mg daily.   Two types of sensitivity analyses were performed. In all cases, reference simulations were based on the scenarios of insulin and meal administration described above (i.e., 40 U of total daily insulin dose separated between basal and bolus insulins in a 60:40 ratio, and the meal equivalent of 165 g glucose given twice daily). Basic local sensitivity analysis was performed to analyze the effect of dapagliflozin treatment (10 mg daily) on 24‐h glucose profiles under different meals and insulin administration times relative to the mealtime. Meal size varied within the 50% interval from the reference value of 165 g. Bolus insulin injection times ranged from 1 h before a meal to 1 h after a meal. In both sensitivity analyses, the insulin dose remained unchanged.   The other type of sensitivity analysis included calculation of the partial rank correlation coefficients (PRCCs) for a set of preselected model parameters against the dependent variables at baseline and at dapagliflozin treatment steady‐state.   44    The values of 10 model parameters (including insulin dose adjustment, protamine fraction, meal size, steady‐state glucose level, glucose absorption rate, insulin‐dependent and insulin‐independent glucose clearance, feedback parameters for insulin effects on glucose production increase, and life span of red blood cells) were sampled 500 times using Latin hypercube sampling from the predefined range (Table  S2 ). Simulations were performed using the obtained values with subsequent calculation of the PRCC to identify the model inputs associated with the disease state (i.e., glycemic control at baseline) and dapagliflozin efficacy (i.e., precent change from baseline in daily mean glucose levels and HbA1c at the last day of week 24 of daily dapagliflozin 10 mg treatment).   Last, simulations with different scenarios of insulin dose adjustment were performed to evaluate the efficacy of dapagliflozin as an add‐on therapy to insulin in detail. HbA1c and average plasma glucose concentration at week 52 of daily dapagliflozin 10 mg treatment were compared between the model prediction with the insulin dose adjusted in the range of −65% to +135% from the reference value of 40 U per day for subjects with different baseline HbA1c and glucose values. RESULTS   The developed glulisine and detemir PK models described the data well, as judged from the goodness‐of‐fit plots (Figures  S1  and  S2 ). All parameters were estimated with reasonable precision (RSE < 50%), and the model converged to the same values in the multi‐start parameter estimation procedure (Table  S1 ). Published PK models of other types of insulins captured the trends in most of the observed data found in the literature (Figures  S3–S6 ). However, for a few sources (e.g., Thorisdottir et al. 2009   23    for aspart or Owens et al. 2019   30    for glargine), overprediction or underprediction of the data can be observed.   Implementation of the insulin‐driven feedback on glucose production allowed an adequately accurate description of the short‐term glucose data (Figure  2a , Figure  S7 ). Meal energy content scalar parameter and absorption from the gut, feedback parameters, and regular insulin dose, required to achieve the observed baseline glucose values, were reasonably well‐estimated (Table  S1 ). Protamine fraction was found to play a major role in glucose recovery times and affected both magnitude and delay parameters of the insulin feedback, as well as insulin‐mediated glucose clearance. Injection of the 50%/50% protamine mixture resulted in a 17.75% lower rate of the glucose clearance and feedback effect than injection of the soluble insulin; the onset of the feedback effect, however, was 18.15% faster for the mixture. The model‐predicted long‐term effects of combined dapagliflozin and insulin treatment reflected in the decline in average daily plasma glucose and HbA1c after 24 weeks of treatment were mostly consistent with the observed data from the  NCT02268214  and  NCT02460978  studies (Figure  2b ).   FIGURE 2.     Open in a new tab   Validation of IGID model for the T1DM population. (a) Glucose short‐term response to aspart and lispro insulins; (b) glucose; and (c) HbA1c long‐term response to aspart and dapagliflozin treatment, mean ± SD. HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin; IGID, integrated glucose‐insulin‐dapagliflozin; mM, millimolar; QD, once daily; SD, standard deviation; T1DM, type 1 diabetes mellitus. Model simulations were used to explore the impact of different meal sizes and timing of insulin administration on daily glucose oscillations in two scenarios: control treatment (insulin only) and following 10 mg daily dapagliflozin (in addition to insulin; Figure  3 ). Changes in meal size primarily affected average levels of plasma glucose (up to ±1.1 mM or ± 13%) and maximum glucose levels (up to 4.5 mM or ± 35%), whereas minimum glucose levels remained unchanged. Dapagliflozin treatment resulted in the glucose concentration curve being downshifted by ~1 mM (11%) relative to the control, with maximum treatment benefit observed at maximum meal size (−1.2 mM), most likely as a consequence of the increased glucose availability in the kidneys (Figure  3a ). In neither scenario (with or without dapagliflozin), glucose levels went below the threshold of hypoglycemia. Perturbations in the bolus insulin administration time relative to the meals did not alter the mean plasma glucose levels. However, marked changes were observed at 1 h before a meal in minimum (−2.327 mM or − 35%) and at 1 h after a meal in maximum glucose concentrations (+6.5 mM or + 50%). Consequently, the dapagliflozin effect varied between −0.45 and −2.5 mM depending on the glucose concentration at a particular time‐period (Figure  3b ). It can be noted that the combined effect of insulin and dapagliflozin in the latter case resulted in glucose lowering beyond the acceptable level of 3.9 mM, although only for ~5 min.   FIGURE 3.     Open in a new tab   Intraday glucose oscillations under different meals (a) and insulin administration times (b) with and without dapagliflozin treatment. Default meal size, 165 g   42   ,    43   ; a.m., after a meal; b.m., before a meal; mM, millimolar; hypoglycemia threshold defined as 3.9 mM based on the Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline.   52     PRCC calculation for the model variables representing baseline and steady‐state glucose and HbA1c levels under dapagliflozin treatment in response to the changes in selected model parameters showed that the behavior of the system is consistent with our general understanding of the glucose‐insulin‐HbA1c relationship and dapagliflozin efficacy (Figure  4 ). In particular, dapagliflozin treatment benefit was most sensitive to insulin dose adjustment. Furthermore, glucose clearance was positively associated with treatment efficacy (i.e., greater efficacy was observed in patients who had higher insulin‐dependent glucose clearance). A reverse correlation was observed for the feedback of insulin on glucose production. The effect of disease severity (i.e., steady‐state glucose) and meal size on percent change from baseline in mean glucose and HbA1c was not statistically significant, which is in line with the results of the local sensitivity analysis. However, both meal size and protamine fraction significantly affected the magnitude of glucose oscillations under treatment.   FIGURE 4.     Open in a new tab   Sensitivity of model outputs to the selected model parameters based on partial rank correlation coefficients. Upper panels – therapeutic options; middle panels – patient management; bottom panels – intrinsic factors; %CFB, percent change from baseline; cl, clearance; dep, dependent; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin; indep, independent; ins, insulin; RBC, red blood cell; Min. – minimum; Max. – maximum; gray color –  p  value > 0.05. To explore the impact of insulin dose adjustment further, average plasma glucose levels and HbA1c responses to dapagliflozin 10 mg at week 52 were evaluated within a wide range of insulin dose adjustments, from −65% to +135%, for three baseline HbA1c levels (6%, 7.1%, and 8%; Figure  5 ). In a population with baseline HbA1c of 7.1%, dapagliflozin as an add‐on therapy to insulin led to a 10.9% reduction in average plasma glucose levels from baseline and an average HbA1c reduction of 0.5% (absolute). Increasing the total daily insulin dose by 20% after dapagliflozin treatment initiation lowers the steady‐state plasma glucose by an additional 6% and HbA1c by 0.787% (absolute) in total. Conversely, decreasing the total daily insulin dose by 20% after dapagliflozin treatment initiation resulted in a marginal 3% decrease in average plasma glucose and 0.126% (absolute) in HbA1c from baseline. These numbers are affected by the disease state parameters, with better response to the dapagliflozin treatment being observed in populations with worsened glycemic control. Depending on the baseline HbA1c level, a daily insulin dose reduction between 15% and 38% was found to be sufficient to counterbal