>Methods   Entropy similarity   The entropy similarity 17  between two spectra  A  and  B  is defined as:      1 − 2 × S A B − S A − S B l n 4   (2)     S A  and  S B  represent the spectral entropy of spectra  A  and  B .  S A B  is the spectral entropy of the 1:1 mixed spectrum  A  and  B . Ion intensities are weighted by equation (3) with  I  as the intensity of each ion.     I ′ = I ( S ≥ 3 ) I w , w = 0.25 + S * 0.25 ( S < 3 )   (3)     Equation (2) can be transformed as given in the  Supplementary Note 1 . If spectra A and B are normalized to give a  ∑ i I i = 1 , only the intensities of matched peaks are needed to calculate entropy similarity. Entropy similarity can then be calculated as:      Similarity = 1 2 ∑ i , j 0 if m / z A , i ≠ m / z B , j f I A , i + I B , j − f I A , i − f I B , j if m / z A , i = m / z B , j With f ( x ) = x l o g 2 x , ∑ i I A , i = 1 , ∑ j I B , j = 1   (4)     Calculations are slightly faster if the spectra are normalized to  ∑ i I i = 0.5 , then using entropy similarity as:      Similarity = ∑ i , j 0 if m / z A , i ≠ m / z B , j f I A , i + I B , j − f I A , i − f I B , j if m / z A , i = m / z B , j With f ( x ) = x l o g 2 x , ∑ i I A , i = 1 2 , ∑ j I B , j = 1 2   (5)     Here,  I A , i  is the intensity of peak  i  in spectrum  A , I B , j  is the intensity of peak  I B , j  in spectrum  B  and  j  represents the mass/charge ratio of product ions. MS/MS spectra search   MS/MS spectra can be compared against spectra libraries by four different methods: identity search, open search, neutral loss search and hybrid search. For identity searches, scientists seek to find the direct hit that identifies a query spectrum against a library spectrum. This search is usually the fastest search because library entries can be constrained to those spectra that match the precursor ion of the query spectrum within the mass accuracy range of a mass spectrometer. Although modern high resolution mass spectrometers today typically yield a mass error of  Δ m / z  < 2 mDa, we here selected a wide search range of ±10 mDa to simulate cases where experimental mass accuracies might be compromised by local noise ions or by low-ion statistics for low-abundant molecules.   The ‘open search’ mode, compares all MS/MS spectra without constraining precursor ion masses. This search mode is used to match experimental spectra to any other molecule that shares critical substructures, such as aglycones and aglycones-glycosides. ‘Open search’ in small molecule MS/MS similarity is slightly different from the ‘open search’ method used in proteomics field, as proteomics still uses precursor ion constraints, but at wide ranges. Next, ‘neutral loss’ searches are performed in a similar way as open searches, but transform all search spectra by subtracting the fragment ion  m / z  from the precursor ion  m / z  values. In effect, neutral loss searches require similar search times as open searches. For ‘hybrid search’ (also called ‘modified cosine search’), every ion in the query spectrum must match either the identical fragment ions or a corresponding neutral loss ions. In this sense, hybrid searches are a mixture of open searches and neutral loss searches. Therefore, hybrid searches require the largest computational time. For Flash entropy hybrid searches, we clarified the algorithm by mandating that each query ion can only be used to match either an open search fragment ion or a neutral loss ion, but cannot be used for both matches. We further prioritize matching fragment ions over matching neutral loss ions. Flash entropy algorithm   Both library spectra and query spectra are normalized before a Flash entropy search. First, the non-fragmented portion of precursor ions and any ion larger than the precursor ion are removed from MS/MS spectra by filtering out  m / z  > (precursor  m / z  − 1.6). The accurate mass of the precursor ion is known for each MS/MS spectrum and can be used for searches, but its abundance is not useful in MS/MS matching. Removing the precursor ions improves the performance of library searching 17  and we here used the 1.6 Da window settings as implemented in the NIST MS search v.3.0 software. MS/MS spectra may also contain varying abundance and number of noise ions, depending on the abundance of the precursor ion, the complexity of co-eluting ions within the ion isolation window during precursor ion selection, tuning, parameters and operation of the mass spectrometer itself. While noise is therefore hard to define, possible fragment ions at <1% the maximal fragment ion abundance carry a high probability to stem from other sources than the precursor ion and are removed. Notably, the fragment intensities are normalized by applying the entropy weights according to equation (3) and afterwards, MS/MS spectra are normalized to 0.5 for the sum of all peak intensities. Spectra are listed consecutively for library spectra entries so that all fragment ions are represented as a tuple: (spectrum identifier by continuous numbering from zero, fragment ion  m / z , ion intensity) in a large list. Next, all ion tuples in the library spectra are sorted by the fragment ion  m / z  (step 1 in  Fig. 1 ). To speed up the  m / z  lookup processes, we created an index of all fragment ion  m / z  values. This step can be omitted if the library is small, but for very large libraries with billions of fragment ions, indexing is advantageous.   For querying spectra in an ‘open search’ against library spectra (ignoring precursor ions), we first initiated zero similarity for all library spectra. We then found all matching fragment ions within the library spectra within a defined ± mass tolerance (step 2). As maximum mass errors may occur for low-abundant ions at 10-mDa difference, we select a generous 20-mDa-wide window for fragment ion-matching to also account for possible measurement errors in library spectra. Lowering this window may speed up calculations even further. Then, for each matching ion pair an entropy similarity value contribution is added, as per equation (6).     Entropy similarity contribution = f I A , i + I B , j − f I A , i − f I B , j , f ( x ) = x l o g 2 x   (6)     This process is given as step 3 in  Fig. 1 . Here  b  is query spectrum ion intensity and  b  is the library spectrum ion intensity. When all ions in the query spectrum are fully queried against the library, the similarity score calculation is completed. Variations of Flash entropy similarity searches   The Flash entropy search can be easily adopted for other types of MS/MS spectral searches. For ‘identity searches’, library spectra are restricted to hits within user-defined mass accuracy windows of the precursor ion accurate mass. For the benchmark tests, we used a wide search window with up to 10 mDa error. Here, all library spectra are sorted by their precursor  m / z  and then indexed as given above. Because the library spectra are sorted, the continuous spectral library numbers give the search range within ±10 mDa. Only spectra within the search range are calculated with equation (5) to yield spectral similarities. Hence, only spectra within the search range have nonzero spectral similarities. For ‘neutral loss’ searches, the fragment ion  m / z  values are replaced by the mass of molecular neutral losses. These are calculated as precursor ion  m / z  minus fragment ion  m / z . All other steps including index and search steps are the same as given in ‘open search’. For ‘hybrid search’ we transform search libraries in the following way: first, all fragment ions in the spectral library are represented as a tuple: (spectral number, fragment ion  m / z , neutral loss mass and ion intensity). Then all entries are sorted from the lowest fragment ion to the highest fragment ion  m / z  value. Entries are copied and recorded by the simplified tuple (spectral number, fragment ion  m / z  and peak intensity). This is the fragment ion table. This list is only used for fragment lookups. All ions are given an ion continuous number, to reflect the sorted list. Next, the original tuple list is sorted by neutral loss masses, generating a new list with a tuple (spectral number, neutral loss mass, ion intensity and ion number). This is called the neutral loss table. Now, all ions from the query spectrum are first compared to the ions in the fragment ion table. Matching ion pairs are recorded by their original ion continuous number. Subsequently, the query fragment ions are compared to the neutral loss table. If a query ion/neutral loss pair is already present in the matching fragment ion table, this ion will be ignored in the neutral loss match. Finally, all matching fragment ions and all matching query ion/neutral loss matches are calculated to yield entropy similarity using equation (6). Memory and time usage of the Flash entropy algorithm   During library searching, the Flash entropy search uses very little memory, with a minimum requirement of  O ( s + p ) , where  s  is the total number of spectra in the library and  p  is the maximum number of matched peaks. This process enables the algorithm to run on low configuration computers, even when processing large spectral libraries. The Flash entropy search has a time complexity of  O ( n m Δ ) , where  m  is the total number of peaks in the query spectra,  m  is the total number of peaks in the library spectra and  Δ  is the matching tolerance. The more accurate MS measurements become, the smaller the user-defined matching tolerance gets. Smaller mass windows result in correspondingly shorter run times for the Flash entropy search algorithm. Benchmark   Spectra from MassBank.us and GNPS were downloaded on 3 March 2023. Additional MS/MS spectra from public repositories were downloaded from the MassIVE/GNPS, MetabolomicsWorkbench. org, MetaboLights and the West Coast Metabolomics Center in December 2022. In total, more than 939 million spectra were available (237,185,147 negative ESI and 701,996,947 positive ESI MS/MS spectra). As library and query spectra, between 100 to 1,000,000 spectra were randomly sampled from those repositories using the function ‘numpy.random.choice’ from Numpy package, v.1.23.5 (ref. 22). All spectra were centroided, summarizing ion intensities with  Δ m / z  < 50 mDa. Spectra were denoised by removing ion intensities at <1% of the most abundant fragment ion. Ion intensities were normalized to a sum of 0.5. Spectra were indexed before testing for computational times.   The spectral similarity calculation time is measured as wall clock time. The algorithm is implemented in Python and tested on major CPU architectures such as x86_64 and ARM from Intel, AMD and Apple. It was also verified in different operating systems, including Linux, Windows and MacOS. All benchmark tests were performed on a personal computer with an AMD Ryzen 9 3900 × 12-Core Processor, 64 GB memory, Nvidia Geforce RTX 2060 Super GPU and 2 TB WD_BLACK SN850X NVMe SSD, installed with a KDE neon 5.26 operation system and Python v.3.9. To benchmark the accuracy of similarity queries, the Flash entropy search was compared to the original implementation of entropy similarity. The native entropy similarity is calculated using the code downloaded from GitHub at  https://github.com/YuanyueLi/SpectralEntropy , v.1.0.0. The BLINK package is downloaded from  https://github.com/biorack/blink  on 9 February 2023. Dot-product score results obtained by the BLINK algorithm were compared to the CosineGreedy function in the MatchMS package, v.0.18.0. We used the recommended bin size for BLINK at 1 mDa. Precursor ion matching tolerances were set to <10 mDa and the MS/MS ion matching tolerance was set to <20 mDa. Memory usage was measured using the command ‘/usr/bin/time -v’ and limited memory with the command ‘systemd-run–scope -p MemoryMax = 4G (16G)’. Extended Data   Extended Data Fig. 1 |. Examples for calculating Flash entropy similarity.     Open in a new tab   (a)  Example when all ions match between query spectrum (top) and library spectrum (bottom). in the two spectra are matched.  (b)  Example when only one pair of ions matches between query and library spectra. Note that the sum intensities of ion abundances in each spectrum are normalized to equal 0.5 (see  Supplementary Note 1  for equations). Hence, mismatched ions do not contribute themselves into the calculations, but are considered during the normalization process. Extended Data Fig. 2 |. Distributions of spectral entropies when sampling spectra from different MS/MS repositories for benchmarking studies.     Open in a new tab   (a)  MassBank.us,  (b)  GNPS for annotated compounds (library),  (c)  all combined experimental public MS/MS repositories including MassIVE/GNPS, MetaboLights, MetabolomicsWorkbench and West Coast Metabolomics Center. Extended Data Fig. 3 |. Computation time required to perform ‘ open search ’ queries using  entropy similarity  for 100 positive ESI and 100 negative ESI mass spectra against spectral libraries of different sizes.     Open in a new tab   MS/MS spectra were sampled from  (a)  GNPS  (b)  public repositories. Box plots display medians as horizontal lines inside the boxes that delineate interquartile ranges (IQR). Whiskers extend to the lowest or highest data point within 1.5x IQR of the 25% and 75% quartiles. N = 200 independent MS/MS spectra randomly sampled from  (a)  GNPS  (b)  public. Extended Data Fig. 4 |. Computation time required to perform ‘ open search ’ queries using  dot product similarity  for 100 positive ESI and 100 negative ESI mass spectra against spectral libraries of different sizes.