>Materials and Methods   Chemicals   All aroma standards other than 1,1,6-trimethyl-1,2-dihydronaphthalene (TDN) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, United States) at >98.8% purity. TDN synthesized from alpha-ionone was donated by Dr. Gavin Sacks Lab at Cornell University ( Kwasniewski et al., 2010 ). A C 7 –C 30  hydrocarbon mixture, used for the determination of Kovats’ retention indices (RI), was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium chloride was purchased from Fisher Chemicals (Fair Lawn, NJ, United States). Rapidase Aroma Revelation (AR2000) was purchased from Creative Enzymes (Shirley, NY, United States). Ultrapure water (Type 1 water) was prepared using the ELGA Lab Water PURELAB Classic (High Wycombe, United Kingdom). L-Tartaric acid (99%) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Sample Preparation for Wine   A total of 22 single variety commercial wines procured at a local market were used for initial assessment of cultivar aroma differences. We sampled 11 wines each of Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon from different states (Missouri and California) and countries (the United States and Australia). To prevent oxidation of the wine, the wine bottles were opened in a nitrogen-filled glove box to create an inert atmosphere and 5 ml aliquots of the wine were added to 2 g of sodium chloride (NaCl) in a 20-ml amber SPME glass vial to inactivate the enzymes and improve headspace partitioning ( Canuti et al., 2009 ). An internal standard solution was added at a volume of 10 μl to each vial to make up the final concentrations of 0.1 mg/L 4-methyl-2-pentanol, 0.05 mg/L 3-octanone, and 0.05 mg/L 2-octanol from the standard stock solutions. The vials were then sealed and analyzed using the headspace solid-phase microextraction gas chromatography mass spectrometry (HS-SPME-GC-MS) method outlined below. All 22 samples were run in two replications in a randomized order in two sequential ordered blocks. Internal standards were added for both metabolic and quantitative analyses to ensure all conditions remain comparable throughout the experiments ( Mizuno et al., 2017 ). Additionally, blanks were run after every 5–6 runs to prevent sample carryover. The quality and consistency of the data were monitored by the following methods: (1) for untargeted analysis by the area of the internal standards not varying from the mean by more the 20% (a disadvantage of SPME is its high run to run variability) and (2) for untargeted feature analysis and semi-quantitative analysis of identified compounds all duplicates results maintained a CV below 15% utilizing the internal standards to account for a run to run SPME extraction variation. Fruit Samples   We sampled 21 Norton and 21 Cabernet Sauvignon grapes for this experiment. The Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon grapes used in this experiment were harvested during 2012–2016 from Rocheport, MO; Mountain Grove, MO; and Blacksburg, VA. Representative triplicate samples were used and included a range of “mature” fruit final brix ratings to allow for the variability known to exist in the F1 population (14.9 to 23.7 degrees brix) to be analyzed. The samples were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen after harvesting and transported to the laboratory in dry ice where they were stored at −80°C until used for the analysis in 2018. Sample Preparation for Free Volatiles   Sample preparation was performed following the method by  Canuti et al. (2009)  and  Hampel et al. (2014)  for free and bound volatiles respectively. For both free and bound volatiles, 60 g of the frozen grape berries were thawed and then ground using a handheld grinder. To prevent oxidation of the berries, 50 μl ascorbic acid (200 g/L stock concentration) was added before grinding. The ground grapes were centrifuged at 11,000 rpm using Eppendorf 5840R for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the grape solids (mostly skins) were further extracted overnight with sodium phosphate extraction buffer (0.1 M sodium phosphate extraction buffer of 13% ethanol by volume adjusted to a pH of 4.5) in a circular shaker (Labnet Orbit 1000, Edison, NJ, United States) at 105 rpm for 16 h overnight followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 11,000 rpm (model 5804 R, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) to separate the solids from the extract. The supernatant was pipetted off and used for further free and bound volatile analysis.   In a 20 ml amber SPME glass vial, 5 ml of the extract was taken and 50 μl of internal standards were added to make a final concentration of 0.01 mg/L 2-octanol and 0.1 mg/L of 4-methyl-2-pentanol, followed by the addition of 2 g NaCl per vial. The samples were then processed for volatile aroma compounds using the HS-SPME-GC-MS. All samples were run in a randomized order in two replicate analysis blocks. Internal standards were added for both metabolic and quantitative analyses to ensure all conditions remain comparable throughout the experiments ( Mizuno et al., 2017 ). Additionally, blanks were run after every 5–6 runs to prevent sample carryover. Sample Preparation for Total/Bound Volatiles   Glycosidically bound (or glycosidase releasable) volatiles were extracted using a method adapted from  Hampel et al. (2014)  and  Awale et al. (2021) . Briefly, a stock Rapidase enzyme solution (250,000 mg/L) (lot no 91542020P) was prepared using 2.5 g of Rapidase in 10 ml of DI water. In a 20 ml glass amber vial, 5 ml aliquots of the prepared supernatant were spiked with 20 μl of the Rapidase enzyme solution to yield a final enzyme concentration of 1,000 ppm and 50 μl of the internal standard solution to yield a final concentration of 0.01 mg/L 2-octanol and 0.1 mg/L of 4-methyl-2-pentanol. The glass vials were sealed and incubated in a 45°C water bath for 4 h. The vials were then cooled to ambient temperature in a 25°C water bath for 10 min to prevent headspace volatilization. A total of 2 g of NaCl was added to the sample vial to inactivate the Rapidase enzyme. The samples were then processed for volatile aroma compounds using the HS-SPME-GC-MS method. Values are either reported as total or bound whereby the free volatiles were subtracted from the total observed after enzymatic digestion. Headspace Solid-Phase Microextraction Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry Analysis   Extraction was conducted based on a method of  Hampel et al. (2014) . Briefly, a 65-μm polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)/divinylbenzene (DVB) 1-cm SPME fiber was used for extraction (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, United States). The samples (grape extracts and wines) in 20 ml amber glass vials were preincubated for 15 min at 45°C to ensure consistent temperature during extraction. The fiber was exposed for 45 min at 45°C in the headspace above the sample prior to GC-MS analysis. All samples were agitated at 500 rpm during extraction.   The HS-SPME-GC-MS system consisted of a PAL autosampler (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, United States) mounted on an Agilent 7890B gas chromatograph (Santa Clara, CA, United States) with Agilent 5977A mass selective detector (MSD). The SPME fiber was desorbed in the inlet at 250°C for 14.7 min, with the inlet in a splitless mode for 2 min (inlet glass liner/SPME direct, 0.75 mm I.D., Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, United States), after which spit flow was turned on (50 mL/min) for the remainder of the GC-MS run. No carry-over was observed between samples with blanks run routinely. The samples were run in two replications randomly in two sequential ordered blocks, with the features averaged. GC oven program was used as described in  Awale et al. (2021) . The MSD was operated in SIM/Scan mode, with SIM mode utilized for the quantification of β-damascenone during targeted analysis (121 m/z; 190 m/z, range 40–250 m/z; 6.4 scans/s). Data Processing Using Untargeted Metabolomics Analysis   The raw data acquired by Masslynx from GC-MS were converted to. cdf (common data format) data using the OpenChrome software. Then, the .cdf files were uploaded to XCMS online 1  as a paired batch job, where peak detection, retention time correction, chromatogram alignment, metabolite feature annotation, statistical analysis, and putative identification were performed using the default parameters ( Tautenhahn et al., 2012 ;  Awale et al., 2021 ). The results were downloaded from the XCMS online on 19 February 2018. The features (intensity of a given  m/z  at a certain time) that are significantly different using  t -test (FDR adjusted  p -value < 0.05;  Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995 ) at 0.05 level and have higher or equal to two-times fold change were filtered and used for further analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed in log-transformed and autoscaled data using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 (Montreal, QC, Canada;  Xia and Wishart, 2016 ). Identification of Compound and Confirmation   Compound identification and confirmation were performed based on the method of  Awale et al. (2021) . Briefly, the significant features identified using ANOVA and PCA loadings were grouped based on their retention time, and the compounds represented by the features were identified using the NIST MS Search v2.2, NIST 14 Mass Spectral Library database (Scientific Instrument Services, Ringoes, NJ, United States). Additionally, linear RI calculated using the Kovats’ equation from a sequence of linear hydrocarbons from C7 to C30 were matched with the NIST data and literature. Confirmation was achieved by comparing mass spectra obtained from the sample with those from the pure standards injected in the same conditions. A selection of identified compounds of interest was then quantified using calibration curves for each compound at five different concentration levels. For compounds whose standards were not available, semi-quantitative analysis was done using the internal standards 2-octanol or 4-methyl-2-pentanol, which were used as internal standards. Screening F1 Population Using Identified Volatiles   A cross between Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon was done in 2005 and planted in the Missouri State Fruit Experiment Station vineyard in 2007 ( Adhikari et al., 2014 ;  Sapkota et al., 2015 ). Since grapevines are heterozygous, the F1 population is segregating and thus can be used as a mapping population to study the genetics of the traits. In the fall of 2016, the berries from 90 F1 genotypes (2 replication each) were harvested and then processed for the free and bound volatile analysis of the berries. Free and bound compounds were quantified in the F1 population using the same GC-MS method as used in berry samples with glycosidase-released compounds used as a proxy for fermentation released aromas ( Hampel et al., 2014 ). Data Analysis   We used an integrated metabolomics workflow for data analysis as used by  Awale et al. (2021) . The data were analyzed using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 ( Xia and Wishart, 2016 ) and R version 4.1.2 statistical software. In MetaboAnalyst, the features with more than 50% missing values were removed and the remaining missing values were replaced by a small value (half of the minimum positive value in the original data). Data filtering using an interquartile range was then performed to remove features arising from the baseline noises and to remove features that do not change throughout the treatments that are unlikely to be used for further analysis. Then sample normalization was performed to account for the differences among the sample, and for the wine data, normalization was done using a reference sample which is the 2-octanol internal standard area. Then, the data was log-transformed and auto-scaled (mean-centered and divided by the standard deviation of each variable) and then used for further statistical analysis. The autoscaling method was used to remove any variation comprised during the analysis (such as a loss of instrumental sensitivity) of an original HRMS peaks list. Univariate statistics, such as a  t -test, was performed for exploratory data analysis to identify the potentially significant features to discriminate the treatments under study. To consider the type II error with repeated tests, FDR correction was applied and FDR-adjusted  p -value < 0.05 was considered ( Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995 ). The PCA was performed with significant features, which is a type of unsupervised method. Results   Wine samples purchased from the supermarket were used to identify differences between the two grape cultivars, and the differences were then validated using random berry samples from different locations, vintages, and different states of ripening ( Figure 1 ). From these wines, we identified more than a thousand significant features between the two cultivars. The feature is a molecular entity with a definite mass and retention time, designated as M (mass/charge) and T (time in minutes) ( Schrimpe-Rutledge et al., 2016 ). These features were then subjected to multivariate analysis, outlined in detail below, to find the compounds that were driving differences between the two cultivars. The PCA scores plot indicated that there was a distinct separation in the volatile profile between wines of the two cultivars despite no effort being made to control for winemaking interventions ( Figure 2 ). We also observed similar differences in free and total volatiles between the berry samples of the two cultivars. The significant feature differences (FDR adjusted  p -value < 0.05, fold change > 1.5) were then used to tentatively identify 165 unique compounds using the NIST library, 34 of which were confirmed and quantified using authentic standards and calibration curves. Among the compounds quantified in wines and berries, 14 were identified and quantified in an F1 mapping population.   FIGURE 1.     Open in a new tab   Research workflow: step 1: the supermarket bought commercial wines were phenotyped to identify differences in volatiles, step 2: the random berry samples of the cultivars were phenotyped for free and bound volatiles to confirm the differences in wine, step 3: using the confirmed compounds in both wines and berries, the F1 population of Norton and Cab were phenotyped. FIGURE 2.     Open in a new tab   Heatmap of the top 25 most influential features for differentiating wine volatiles between Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon. While only top contributors are shown the heatmaps were generated using all the features. The rows in the heatmap represent features [M (m/z),T (time in minutes)] and the columns indicate sample categories. The colors of the heatmap cells indicate the abundance of compounds across different samples. The color gradient, ranging from dark blue through white to dark red, represents low, middle, and high abundance of a compound, respectively. Feature Extraction   Wine Volatiles   Of 1,064 identified features that characterized the populations, 403 were significantly different at a 5% level of significance and had greater than the 1.5-fold change between Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon ( Supplementary Table 1 ). There were 207 features present at higher intensities in Cabernet Sauvignon wines, whereas 196 features were higher in Norton wines. The Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon wines generally had a consistent difference in feature intensity across the wines ( Figure 2 ). To reduce the dimensionality of the data and better represent most of the variation of the data through a few unrelated dimensions, unsupervised PCA was performed using the 403 significantly different features between Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon. PCA analysis using the significant features between the two cultivars indicated that the commercial wines of these two cultivars confirmed the differences in the volatile composition ( Figure 3A ). PC1 explained 40.42% of the variation, mostly the variation between two cultivars, whereas PC2 explained 12.17% of the variation. The differences were driven by many features which were later identified to be methyl salicylate, β-damascenone, phenylethyl alcohol, and eugenol among others. The two cultivars showed clear isolation in terms of the wine volatiles and did not show any differences in terms of the winery, vintage, as well as the location. Norton wines had a greater distribution compared to Cabernet Sauvignon which might be due to stylistic variation in winemaking styles of Norton.   FIGURE 3.     Open in a new tab   Principal components analysis (PCA) scores plot for the distribution of  (A)  wine volatiles,  (B)  free volatiles,  (C)  total volatiles features in Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon (Cab) grapes and wines. The ellipses show 95% confidence interval. There is a separation based on cultivar for free, total, and wine metabolic features. Free Volatiles   To validate the differences observed between the two cultivars in wine, which were fruit-derived, we performed berry volatile analysis on berry samples from different locations and maturity. Similar to the wine findings, Cabernet Sauvignon showed higher intensity of 240 metabolic features in comparison to Norton, whereas Norton grapes had a higher intensity of 178 features ( Supplementary Table 2 ). The PCA scores plot demonstrated differences in the free volatile composition and proportion between two cultivars, in which PC1 explained 44.9% of the variation and PC2 explained 14.1% of the variation. PC1 demonstrated separation due to cultivar in aroma profile whereas PC2 indicated variation between samples within the cultivar ( Figure 3B ). PCA loadings show that there were several features which were later identified to be methyl salicylate, nerol, and TDN among others that were driving the differences between the two cultivars, and many of these features were also shared with the wine samples. The two cultivars formed two separate groups without any overlapping, which indicates that the free volatiles in Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon are very different. Additionally, we also performed PCA using ripeness (as determined by brix) and location (figures not shown) and found no distinct separation based on either location or state of maturity. Total/Glycosidically Bound Volatiles   In our study, the total volatiles represents the total of all volatiles present in the berries, including free volatiles and volatiles released from precursors due to enzymatic action. The only features that should increase would be due to the enzymatic release of glycosidically bound compounds, though there also could be overlap with free volatiles, for those compounds unchanged by glycosidase. The Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon exhibited 302 significant features differences for total volatiles among the 793 features identified ( Supplementary Table 3 ), among which 215 features were present in higher intensity in Cabernet Sauvignon than Norton. Similarly, 87 features were significantly higher in intensity in Norton grapes. The PCA using the significant features demonstrated no overlap between the two groups indicating that Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon are very different in terms of the total volatile composition ( Figure 3C ). PC1 explained 49.4% of the variation and demonstrated mostly separation due to genotype, whereas PC2 explained around 14.38% of the variation between samples within the genotype ( Figure 3C ). These separations were driven by many features that differentiate the two cultivars and also shared with free and wine volatiles. Again, these cultivars did not show distinct differences in terms of location or varying degrees of maturity. The separation between the two cultivars was not as strong as what was observed in wine or berries, but it did yield some significant features differentiating the cultivars not observed in the other samples. Identification of Compounds From Significant Features   To understand the biological significance of the feature differences, compound identification was performed. Using the NIST library database, comparing RI with that of literature, and comparing the mass spectra with the standards available in the laboratory, we were able to tentatively identify a total of 165 unique compounds among which 83, 41, and 70 putative compounds are free, bound, and wine volatile, respectively ( Supplementary Table 4 ). Of these, 13 compounds were common in the free, bound, and wine volatiles samples. The compounds identified in this way were further screened to make sure they were likely to be sample-derived and not artifacts of sample preparation or analysis. For the compounds whose authentic standards were available, proper calibration and internal standards were used to minimize the run-to-run variation. Compounds from a wide range of classes such as fatty acid alcohols, norisoprenoids, terpenes, esters, terpinols, and acids were found to vary between the two cultivars ( Table 1 ).   TABLE 1.   Mean concentration (μg/L) and standard error of mean (SEM) of free volatiles, total volatiles, and wine volatiles in Norton and Cabernet Sauvignon.         Name   Odor threshold a     Free volatiles     Total volatiles     Commercial wine volatiles             Norton     Cabernet Sauvignon     Norton     Cabernet Sauvignon     Norton     Cabernet Sauvignon             Mean   SE   Mean   SE   Mean   SE   Mean   SE   Mean   SE   Mean   SE           β-Caryophyllene   64   0.14   0.06   0.07   0   0.14   0.02   0.08   0.01   nd   nd   nd   nd       p-Cymene     0.15   0.06   0.01   0.01   0.45   0.25   0   0   5.12   0.57   1.9   0.15       Terpinolene