>METHODS   BT549 breast cancer cells were treated with etomoxir concentrations that spanned 10-200 μM. HEK-293T cells were treated with metformin concentrations that spanned 0.05-1.5 mM and rotenone concentrations that spanned 10-200 nM. These cell lines were selected for investigation on the basis of previous work. 19 – 21   Metabolites were extracted from cells and analyzed with an Agilent 1260 HPLC system or an Agilent 1290 UPLC system coupled to an Agilent 6540 or an Agilent 6545 quadruple time-of-flight mass spectrometer. Polar metabolites were separated on a Luna aminopropyl column at room temperature or a zic-pHILIC column at 40 °C. Lipids were separated on a Kinetex evo C18 column operated at 35 °C.   After the raw data files were converted from each dose-response experiment to an  mzXML  format, peak detection and correspondence determination were performed by the XCMS R package with the  centWave, obiwarp , and  group.density  algorithms. The XCMS output files were then analyzed by TOXcms. Statistical comparisons were performed by the  calcdosestat  function. Monotonically increasing and decreasing dose-response trends were filtered out by the  trendfilter  function ( pval_cutoff = 0.05, pval_thres = 1, anova_cutoff = 0.05, trend = “mono”, relChange_cutoff = 0.10 ). To estimate ED 50  values, each trend was fit with a generalized dose-response logistic model as described previously 22 . Global dose-response patterns were analyzed and visualized by the  plotpca  and  clusttrend  functions (sort.method = c(“clust”, “layer”), sort.thres=20).   Additional method details can be found in  Supporting Information .   All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the publication and supporting files. TOXcms is freely available at  pattilab.wustl.edu/software/toxcms . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION   TOXcms Workflow.   In this work, we will primarily focus on the application of liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) because of its widespread use in untargeted metabolomics and its relatively broad metabolite coverage compared to other analytical platforms. 23  LC/MS analysis of a typical metabolic extract from a biological sample results in the detection of thousands of so-called metabolomic features, which are defined as signals in the LC/MS data having a unique pair of retention time and  m/z  values. While dose-response curves could theoretically be made for each reported feature without additional software, such an effort would require inspection of tens of thousands of data points and manual statistical assessment. TOXcms is designed to automate this process.   Our approach is to model dose-response curves with TOXcms, which is a program that we designed to process standard files output by the XCMS software. First, data are processed by XCMS for peak detection and correspondence determination. No pairwise comparisons or statistics are needed from XCMS. The XCMS peaks table is then directly imported into TOXcms as a CSV file. We note that, even though TOXcms was designed to work in tandem with XCMS, it is compatible with any data having dose and intensity coordinates ( Figure 2 ). This includes peaks tables from other commonly used software in metabolomics, both freely available and commercial. An advantage of a platform-independent input is that TOXcms can be used to analyze data from a variety of mass spectrometry methods, ranging from gas chromatography/mass spectrometry to flow injection analysis. Moreover, dose-response curves of metabolites derived from mass spectrometry can easily be correlated with dose-response curves of other physical parameters such as oxygen consumption and proliferation rate by using TOXcms.   Figure 2. Informatic workflow of TOXcms.     Open in a new tab   There are three general steps to the TOXcms workflow. First, raw mass spectrometry (MS) data are converted into a peaks table by XCMS (left) or any other appropriate peak detection and alignment algorithm (right). Second, from the peaks table, the intensities of each feature are plotted as a function of dose. Statistical comparisons between each dose are then performed to determine whether there are any significant changes to a feature’s intensity. Features showing no statistically significant changes are placed into the “no differences” group. Features showing only decreases or increases in intensity are placed into the “decrease” or “increase” group, respectively. Features showing significant increases and decreases are placed into the “inflection” group. Last, the third data-processing step of TOXcms is to cluster dose-response curves that have similar shapes by combining ED 50  values with hierarchical clustering or principal component analysis (see  Figure 3  and  Figure S3 ) A key function of TOXcms is organizing the dose-response plots on the basis of statistical trends, which is essential to correlating changes between features. Features that monotonically decrease with dose (i.e., features whose intensity only decreases with increasing drug concentration) are assigned to the “decrease” group. Features that monotonically increase with dose (i.e., features whose intensity only increases with increasing drug concentration) are assigned to the “increase” group. When a feature shows both an increase and a decrease with dose, it is assigned to the “inflection” group. Although an inflection trend may not be insightful when searching for drug targets, we anticipate that this group will be most relevant to other applications of TOXcms such as rescue experiments that are discussed later. Finally, features that do not show any statistically significant changes between doses are assigned to the “no differences” group. Each detected feature is assigned to one of these four groups ( Figure S2 ). To start the assignment process, a simple t-test is performed between each pair of adjacent doses. If none of the p-values calculated from adjacent doses of a particular feature are above a user-defined threshold, then the feature is automatically placed into the “no differences” group. On the other hand, if at least one t-test produces a p-value that passes the user’s filter, then the data are evaluated by an ANOVA test. Provided the difference between the means of all doses is not above a user-specified significance threshold, the feature is moved to the “no differences” group. If the feature does pass the ANOVA test, then it is assessed to be monotonically increasing or decreasing by applying  eqs 1 – 3 :      i f ∑ i = 2 n C i , i − 1 = ∑ i = 2 n C i , i − 1 * r e l i , i − 1 , t h e n m o n o t o n i c i n c r e a s e   (1)       i f ∑ i = 2 n C i , i − 1 = − ∑ i = 2 n C i , i − 1 * r e l i , i − 1 , t h e n m o n o t o n i c d e c e a s e   (2)       i f ∑ i = 2 n C i , i − 1 ≠ ∑ i = 2 n C i , i − 1 * r e l i , i − 1 , then inflection   (3)      where  C i,i−1  = 1 if the intensity measurements of dose  i  and dose  i −1 are significantly different and  C i,i −1  = 0 if they are not. When the mean intensity at dose  i  is greater than that at dose  i −1, then  rel i,i −1  = 1. If it is lower at dose  i  than at dose  i −1 then  rel i,i −1  = −1, and if the mean intensities do not change,  rel i,i −1  = 0. By superimposing  C  and  rel  using  eqs 1 – 3 , a trend is classified into monotonically increasing, monotonically decreasing, or inflection groups. Next, for the monotonic-increase group and the monotonic-decrease group, the effective dose at 50% maximal value (ED 50 ) is calculated by fitting a logistic dose-response model to the measured intensities as has been previously described. 22  We note that the calculated ED 50  values may not equal the actual ED 50  values when insufficient data have been input into TOXcms to create a well-defined dose-response curve (e.g., insufficient replicates and/or doses). In this work, we observed meaningful changes with only three biological replicates but additional replicates may be required in other studies. Finally, to aid in the interpretation of TOXcms results at the global level, principal component analysis (PCA) is performed on the normalized intensities of all input features. The first two components are plotted and colored according to the predicted ED 50  values. Additionally, hierarchical clustering of feature intensities is performed to provide an orthogonal visualization ( Figure S3 ). For detailed analysis, dose-response curves are plotted for all detected features and the full TOXcms results are provided in an automatically generated CSV file. Dose Design.   The experiments described herein necessitate that samples be treated with multiple doses of a compound. A critical question is which dose levels should be applied ( Figure S4 ). The potency of drugs and toxicants can span a large range of concentrations. In theory, a wide distribution of doses could be tested with fine spacing. Practically, however, sample sizes and dose ranges are limited by resources, sample type, and ethical considerations (e.g., when studies involve human subjects and animals). Additionally, the number of dose levels evaluated may be constrained by the availability of a compound, its solubility, manufactured dose sizes, etc. Strategies to identify optimal doses most efficiently when performing a dose-response study have therefore been the focus of decades of research, with many statistical theories and mathematical models having been applied. A discussion of these efforts is beyond the scope of the current work, but details can be found elsewhere. 24 – 27   Although our TOXcms-based approach can be readily applied to animal and patient samples, the data presented in this study were generated from cells in culture. We selected doses on the basis of ED 50  values available in the literature, doses used in previous studies to elicit various end points, and clinical relevance. 21 , 28 ,  29  It is interesting to consider other examples, however, when no prior knowledge is available. In these instances, a trial experiment may be performed first to determine the approximate range of sensitivity to the compound. It has been suggested that a 10-fold spacing in compound concentration is adequate for such preliminary cell-culture experiments. 30  Rather than doing LC/MS-based metabolomics on samples from each dose, we recommend monitoring other end points that are easier to measure (e.g., viability, respiration, etc.). Upon identifying concentration ranges where phenotypes are altered, more narrowly spaced doses around the responsive range can then be tested in a subsequent experiment by metabolomics. In our experiences, it is not essential that these doses be evenly spaced. Rather, doses should be selected to maximize fitting of the dose-response curve. Ideally, at least one dose should elicit a minimal metabolic response, at least one dose should elicit a maximal metabolic response, and several doses should elicit a metabolic response on the transition part of the ED 50  curve ( Figure S4 ). Evaluating TOXcms Performance.   We next sought to assess the ability of TOXcms to construct dose-response curves and accurately group them on the basis of statistical trends. To create well-defined data sets for evaluation, we used  in silico  methods to simulate metabolomic data sets from which false positive rates (FPR) and true positive rates (TPR) were determined. We started by performing a metabolomic analysis on three biological replicates of BT549 breast cancer cells. These three experimental data files were used to simulate data sets for four different drug doses. First, we randomly selected 1000 features from the 26 853 in the experimental data and calculated their mean intensity. Next, we fit a normal distribution centered around the calculated mean intensity with a standard deviation equal to the mean intensity multiplied by a standard error that was randomly selected from the experimental measurements. We simulated three replicates for each dose by using the distribution that was fit for each of the 1000 randomly selected features. Given that the intensity of the randomly selected 1000 features exhibited no statistically significant dose-response trend between the data sets but shared the same statistical characteristics of real metabolomic data, these 1000 features allowed us to assess the FPR of TOXcms. To assess the TPR, we repeated a similar procedure for a unique set of 100 randomly selected features from the experimental BT549 data. We simulated a dose-dependent trend for these 100 features by using the generalized logistic model of dose responses with a bimodal distribution of ED 50  values ( Figure S5 ). Of the 100 features, one-half were simulated to increase as a function of dose and one-half were simulated to decrease as a function of dose. For each of the 50 increasing and decreasing features, 25 had ED 50  values normally distributed around 40 arbitrary units and 25 had ED 50  values normally distributed around 150 arbitrary units. For each simulated dose, we added variance equal to the mean standard error of a representative drug (etomoxir, as measured by nine experimental LC/MS runs).   These simulations resulted in three replicate data sets for each of four doses. The data contained 1000 features that showed no statistically significant trends and 100 features that showed dose-dependent trends. Each of the data files were run through the TOXcms workflow with t-test and ANOVA cutoffs of  p  = 0.05 and a relative change cutoff of 0.1. The TOXcms output was analyzed by recording the number of false positives and true positives. False positives occurred when any of the 1000 features not showing a dose-dependent trend were reported to have a trend by TOXcms. True positives occurred when any of the 100 features showing a dose-dependent trend were indeed reported to have a trend by TOXcms. We repeated the process 100 times, randomly selecting 1000 features to show no statistical trend and randomly selecting 100 features to show a dose-dependent trend in each simulation. We estimated 95% confidence intervals for the FPR, TPR, and false discovery rate (FDR) by using a bootstrapping method where we resampled the true positive/false positive counts of each TOXcms output file 1000 times. The FPR, TPR, and FDR were calculated for each resampled data set. The 25 th  and 975 th  lowest and highest values were used as the upper and lower bounds of the confidence interval for each metric, respectively. We determined the FPR to be <0.4%, the TPR to be ~85%, and the FDR to be <4% ( Figure 3 ,  Figure S6 , and  Table S1 ). The accuracy of the ED 50  values returned by TOXcms was also evaluated by PCA. As shown in  Figure 3  and  Figure S6 , a PCA plot of the ED 50  values output by TOXcms was able to recover the underlying bimodal distribution of the true ED 50  values. These results suggest that PCA plots produced by TOXcms can be used to visualize clusters of metabolomic features that change with correlated dose-response trends and unimodal ED 50  value distributions.   Figure 3. PCA plot produced by TOXcms can be used to visualize clusters of metabolomic features that change with similar dose-response classifications.     Open in a new tab   Each dot on the plot represents a distinct feature. Features in the  in silico  data showing a monotonic increase are on the left, and features showing a monotonic decrease are on the right. Data are color-coded based on their ED 50  values. Features in the  in silico  data that do not show a statistically significant trend are colored gray. The plot shows that the ED 50  values calculated by TOXcms are in general agreement with the actual ED 50  values (see  Figure S6 ) and that TOXcms is able to capture the bimodal distribution of dose-response curves in the data set, reflected by the separation of low ED 50  values (circled in purple) and high ED 50  values (circled in green) TOXcms Applied to Metformin.   We aimed to apply TOXcms to assess the possibility that metformin has multiple protein targets with different drug binding affinities. We first treated HEK-293T cells with 0, 0.05, 0.5, 1, or 1.5 mM concentrations of metformin for 48 h. Cellular metabolites were then extracted, analyzed by LC/MS, and the data were processed with the TOXcms workflow outlined above. Out of the 19 506 metabolomic features detected, 371 showed monotonic increases or monotonic decreases in intensity as a function of metformin dose (p-value and ANOVA ≤ 0.05). Metabolites identified to have a monotonic increase are consistent with the expected mechanism of metformin action ( Figure S7a – d ). 31  Most interestingly, the PCA plot produced by TOXcms showed only two clusters corresponding to features that increased or decreased as a function of metformin with similar ED 50  values ( Figure S7e ). The metformin plot is distinct from that of the  in silico  data above ( Figure 3 ), where increasing or decreasing features were observed for two distinct clusters of ED 50  values. Our results suggest that only a single metabolic network effect occurs over the drug concentrations of metformin evaluated. TOXcms Applied to Etomoxir.   Etomoxir is known to inhibit the enzyme carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPT1), which transforms acyl-CoAs to acyl-carnitines (ACs). Given that neither long-chain fatty acids nor acyl-CoAs can directly cross the inner mitochondrial membrane, CPT1 activity is required to transport long acyl chains into the mitochondrial matrix for oxidation. Beyond its applications in metabolic research, etomoxir has also drawn interest as a potential therapeutic for conditions ranging from multiple sclerosis to cancer. 32 – 34  Notably, however, concerns of hepatotoxicity from a clinical trial of etomoxir in congestive heart failure patients have limited applications of etomoxir to treat human disease. 35   A benefit of evaluating our approach with etomoxir is that CPT1 has many substrates and products having a variable acyl chain length. Each chemical species should yield similar dose-response trends that are grouped by TOXcms. As an experimental test, we treated BT549 breast cancer cells with 0, 10, 50, or 200 μM of etomoxir for 48 h. Complementary methods were applied to analyze polar and nonpolar metabolites in separate LC/MS experiments. Processing of the resulting data with XCMS led to the detection of 26 920 total features. We point out that, although XCMS must process data from reversed-phase and hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography experiments separately, TOXcms can model dose-response curves for any set of input features (irrespective of the  m/z  values and retention times assigned by XCMS). This allowed us to process all XCMS files simultaneously, enabling TOXcms to make correlations between the different experiments. From the XCMS input files, TOXcms identified 908 features (<4% of the total features) having a statistically significant monotonic increase or monotonic decrease as a function of etomoxir dose. Visualization of the features on the PCA plot produced by TOXcms showed a bimodal distribution of ED 50  values that was similar to the pattern observed for our  in silico  data but distinct from the pattern of our metformin data, indicating that etomoxir has at least two biochemical targets at the concentrations tested ( Figure 4a ).   Figure 4.     Open in a new tab   TOXcms reveals that etomoxir has a second protein target at 200 μM in BT549 breast cancer cells. (a) PCA plot shows distribution of ED 50  values calculated by TOXcms. Each dot on the plot represents a distinct feature. Features with increasing dose-response trends are shown on the left of the plot, and features with decreasing dose-response trends are shown on the right. ED 50  values are color-coded. Features in the data that do not show a statistically significant trend are colored gray. Similar to the  in silico  data plotted in  Figure 3 , data from etomoxir-treated samples show a bimodal distribution of ED 50  values (purple and green circles). (b-f) Features in the purple circles were identified as substrates and products of the primary target of etomoxir (i.e., CPT1). (g) Features in the green circles were identified to be in pathways distinct from CPT1, and hence were annotated as off-target. (h) At hundreds of micromolar, etomoxir decreases proliferation of BT549 cells. The dose-response curve of this phenotype does not correlate with the dose-response curve of the substrates and products of CPT1. Instead, the dose-response curve of proliferation correlates with the off-target effect of etomoxir. (i) Similarly, the dose-response curve of mitochondrial respiration correlates with the dose-response curve of etomoxir’s off-target effect. Taken together, these data demonstrate that etomoxir inhibits CPT1 at low concentrations but inhibits mitochondrial respiration via an off-target effect at high concentrations We first focused on features from the PCA plot having ED 50  values less than 2 μM (colored purple on  Figure 4a ), which we expected to be associated with CPT1. For these features, we found a subgroup exhibiting a monotonic decrease in intensity as a function of etomoxir dose (right of  Figure 4a ) and a subgroup of features exhibiting a monotonic increase in intensity as a function of etomoxir dose (left of  Figure 4a ). As anticipated, among the subgroup of features showing a monotonic increase in intensity was carnitine ( Figure 4b ). In contrast, among the subgroup of features showing a monotonic decrease in intensity was many ACs, including those with acyl chains of 18:0, 18:1, 16:0, 16:1, 14:0, 14:1, 12:0, 10:0, and 8:0 ( Figure 4c – f  and  Figure S8 ). We note that the methods we applied here are not optimized for analysis of CoA species, which are substrates for CPT1. Our ability to detect accumulated acylCoAs was therefore limited. Notwithstanding, it is clear that the cluster of features from the PCA plot having low ED 50  values (<2 μM) is a result of altered CPT1 activity. Our observations indicate that low micromolar concentrations of etomoxir are sufficient to inhibit its primary target, which is consistent with previous reports. 36 ,  37   We next turned our attention to features from the PCA plot having high ED 50  values, which we associated with an off-target effect of etomoxir. These features also partitioned into those showing a monotonic increase and a monotonic decrease in intensity as a function of etomoxir dose. Although there were many features in the cluster that we could not identify, which is typical in untarge