>Methods   Ethical statement   The Alzheimer’s disease dataset used for speed benchmarking is an exploratory study coordinated by Duke University under R. Kaddurah-Daouk. The protocol was approved by the UC San Diego’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) protocol #202063, Indiana University IRB study #1011003338, Kansas University IRB study #CR00020412, University of Wisconsin IRB study IORG0000056 approved 3-29-2023, New York University IRB study #i20-00427. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Animal studies   As described in the initial study, mice were cohoused by gender groups of 4–5 in individually ventilated cages (Optimice IVC, Animal Care Systems, Centennial, CO) on a 12:12-h (6:00/18:00) light:dark cycle at 68–79 °F with 40–60% humidity and provided water and standard rodent chow (Rodent chow, Harlan 2918) ad libitum. Brain tissue samples were collected from 3, 16, 59, and 92 weeks old male and female wild-type mice on a C57BL/6 N background. All procedures were approved by the IACUC of the University of California, Davis, which is an AAALAC-accredited institution. Animal housing and euthanasia were performed in accordance with the recommendations of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.   MassCube project   MassCube is a Python computing library with a total of 16 modules to handle a wide range of data processing tasks and fundamental objects designed for LC-MS/MS data, including raw data management, parameters, feature detection, feature evaluation, feature grouping, normalization, annotation, alignment, network analysis, statistical analysis, visualization, phenotype classifier builder, workflows and other utility functions. Documentation for MassCube is available at  https://huaxuyu.github.io/masscubedocs .   Raw MS data parsing and metadata management   MassCube supports standardized raw MS data in mzML and mzXML formats. Raw MS data are read and parsed into the  MSData  object, which was designed to organize high-dimensional LC-MS/MS data, manage metadata, and facilitate downstream processing and visualization. Within the  MSData  object, scans are organized sequentially, with each scan represented as a  Scan  object. MassCube automatically records the timestamp of each individual file for quality control, intensity normalization, and batch effect correction. Metadata for data processing were recorded and stored as a Python  dictionary  object including assembly of modules, data processing parameters, and versions of dependencies. The metadata are automatically exported with timestamp for trackable and repeatable analysis. Examples were shown in Supplementary Note  1 . Feature detection   MassCube feature detection clusters MS signals from unique ions, followed by Gaussian filter-assisted feature segmentation. A region of interest (ROI) is defined as an  m/z  value that appears continuously across multiple MS1 scans. Let there be a total of  n  MS1 scans denoted as S =  s 1 , s 2 , …,  s n . The search begins with the first scan  s 1 , initializing a set of ROIs using all  m/z  values in  s 1 . Suppose there are  m 1   m/z  values in  s 1 , then we have  m 1  ROIs initiated from  s 1 , denoted as R = ROI 1 , … , ROI m1 . The algorithm then proceeds to the second scan  s 2 , matching the  m/z  values in  s 2  to the initiated ROIs. If a match occurs within a given  m/z  tolerance (default = 0.01 Da), the ROI will be extended. Otherwise, a gap is detected. Upon completion of each new MS1 scan, the algorithm transfers all ROIs with gap numbers exceeding a specified threshold (default = 30) to the final set of ROIs, which will no longer be extended in subsequent calculations. This process iterates through all MS1 scans up to  s n . Subsequently, a feature segmentation algorithm was used to separate different ion species within a given ROI. For ROI i , suppose it contains  k  MS1 scans, resulting in  k  intensity values represented as an array  I  =  int 1 , …,  int k . First, a one-dimensional Gaussian filter is applied to smooth the signal array  I , generating the smoothed signal  I’  for edge detection. Subsequently, peaks above the baseline are captured based on peak prominence ratio calculated using the  SciPy  Python package. The local minimum between any two adjacent peaks are determined as the edges for segmentation. Importantly, using the scan number of detected edges, the original signal array  I  rather the smoothed array  I’  is segmented, with corresponding intensities reported by MassCube. Two parameters are critical for a successful peak segmentation that is robust to noise and can accurately separate two ion species. One parameter is the sigma ( σ ) that controls the level of smoothing in the Gaussian filter. Over-smoothing the signal results in loss of peak shape details and inability to distinguish coeluted isobaric species, while under-smoothing makes the signal too sensitive to noise, leading to incorrect segmentation of a single peak. The other parameter is the prominence ratio, which measures how much a peak stands out from the surrounding baseline and is defined as the ratio of vertical distance between the peak and its lowest contour line to  ( I ′ ) . Feature grouping   MassCube systematically computes the correlations between detected features for annotating isotopes, adducts, and in-source fragments (ISFs). The algorithm considers the  m/z  difference, retention times, scan-to-scan correlations calculated by Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient, and MS/MS spectra. It sequentially annotates isotopes, ISFs, and adducts. This implies that features annotated as isotopes will not be considered as ISFs or adducts, and features annotated as ISFs will not be considered as alternative adducts.   Annotation of isotopes is critical for compound annotation, determination of charge states, and determination of the presence of halogen atoms. MassCube annotates isotopes based on the  m/z  difference and retention times. Charge state is further determined based on isotope patterns. By default, singly and doubly charged ion species are considered, and users may define the range of charge states to be considered in MassCube. ISF is a major source of false feature annotations. MassCube annotates ISFs based on  m/z , retention times, scan-to-scan correlations, and MS/MS spectra. An annotated ISF must meet the following criteria: (1) its precursor  m/z  presences in the parent MS/MS spectrum; (2) its scan-to-scan correlation with the parent ion at commonly detected scans is higher than tolerance (default = 0.7). When the number of common scans is not sufficient (less than 5) to calculate scan-to-scan correlation, retention time is matched by default tolerance = 0.05 min. MassCube annotates adducts based on  m/z , retention time, and scan-to-scan correlation. By default, [M + H] + , [M + H-H 2 O] + , [M+Na] + , [M + K] + , [M + NH 4 ] + , [2 M + H] + , [3 M + H] + , [M + 2H] 2+  are considered in positive ion mode; [M-H] − , [M-H-H 2 O] − , [M+Cl] − , [M + CH 3 OO] − , [M + HCOO] − , [2M-H] − , [3M-H] − , [M-2H] 2−  are considered in negative ion mode. Users may choose to consider additional adduct types or define custom adduct types in MassCube. A pair of annotated adducts must meet the following criteria: (1) their  m/z  difference agrees with the defined value; (2) their scan-to-scan correlation is higher than tolerance (default = 0.7). When the number of common scans is not sufficient (less than 5) to calculate scan-to-scan correlation, retention time is matched by default tolerance = 0.05 min. Feature evaluation   Reporting chromatographic peak metadata is essential for researchers to focus on Gaussian-shaped peaks and avoid noise. Three metrics are automatically calculated and reported including asymmetry factor, Gaussian similarity, and noise score. More metrics can be easily computed using the  masscube  Python package, including the variance of  m/z  values and retention time, peak width and the average intensity of the top three scans (i.e., top average). Asymmetry factor measures how symmetrical a peak is by comparing the distances from the center to its two flanks. For a given chromatographic peak with nnn MS1 scan points, let the set of MS signal intensities be  S  =  s 1 ,  s 2 , …,  s n , corresponding to  n  retention times  T  =  t 1 ,  t 2 , …,  t n . The retention time of the apex  t a  is defined as     t a = t a r g m a x ( S )   1     MassCube then identifies the first MS1 scan point from the apex  t a  to the left where the intensity falls below 10% of the peak height, denoted as  t left , and similarly to the right, yielding  t right . The asymmetry factor is then calculated as:     a s y m m e t r y f a c t o r = t r i g h t − t a t a − t l e f t   2     If  t left  =  t a , the asymmetry factor is defined as 99. This convention is used to indicate a scenario where the left side of the peak is the apex, suggesting a highly asymmetrical peak.   Gaussian similarity quantifies the resemblance of a given chromatographic peak to a perfect Gaussian function. The algorithm first fits a Gaussian function to the data  S  =  s 1 ,  s 2 , …,  s n , resulting in the fitted signal  S’  =  s 1 ’ ,  s 2 ’ , …,  s n ’ . The cosine similarity score is then computed between the original signal and the fitted signal:     G a u s s i a n s i m i l a r i t y = c o s i n e ( S , S ′ )   3     This score ranges from −1 to 1, where a score closer to 1 indicates a high similarity to a Gaussian function. The noise score measures the fluctuation of the MS signal over time. For a given feature data set  S  =  s 1 ,  s 2 , …,  s n , a data point  s i  is considered a turning point if it meets the following condition:     s i − s i − 1 × s i + 1 − s i < 0 , i ∈ 2 , … , n − 1   4     The total number of turning points is counted as  p , and the noise score is calculated as:     n o i s e l e v e l = p − 1 n − 2   5     When a peak is perfectly smooth, the noise score is 0, as there is only one turning point at the apex. Standard-free retention time correction   MassCube requires no additional input, such as a list of internal standards or known metabolites including  m/z  and reference retention time for retention time correction. The algorithm is designed to be applicable even in the absence of spiked internal standards. The anchor features for retention time correction are selected using QC samples. Suppose  n  QC samples are analyzed. MassCube first selects the QC sample QC i  with the highest total intensity as the reference. Subsequently, features are sorted by  m/z  values from low to high, leading to F 1 , …, F m . All features are examined sequentially. Let  mz j  and  noise j  refer to the  m/z  value and noise score of F j , respectively. A feature F j  is considered a valid retention time anchor if the following conditions are met:     m z j − m z j − 1 > m z t o l ∧ m z j + 1 − m z j > m z t o l ∧ ( n o i s e j < n o i s e t o l )   6     where  mz tol  = 0.01 and  noise tol  = 0.3 by default. Finally, the valid retention time anchors with the top 50 peak heights are further selected and split into training and testing data. For a given sample, the retention times of the selected anchors are located, and outliers are removed to prevent failed retention time correction. A linear interpolation model is then established for retention time correction.   Evaluation of the retention time correction algorithm was performed using the mouse brain dataset conducted separately for four ion modes. The evaluation workflow is as follows: (1) Load the retention time correction models, which were automatically exported after MassCube data processing. (2) Obtain the retention times of the testing anchors for evaluation, which are different from the training features used for model construction. (3) Apply the retention time correction models to the retention times of the testing anchors. (4) Compare the corrected retention times to the reference retention times. Feature alignment and gap filling   MassCube identifies the commonly detected features across different files for alignment using  m/z  and retention time, with default tolerances set to 0.01 Da and 0.2 min, respectively, which are tunable. Gap filling is performed by forced peak-picking using raw MS data, where the highest MS signal is identified within a specified retention time window (default = reference retention time ± 0.05 min). Multimodal feature annotation   MassCube annotates features by  m/z -RT match, identity search and fuzzy search using  Flash Entropy Search  algorithm implemented in  ms-entropy  Python package (ver. 1.2.2). MS/MS spectral preprocessing is crucial for accurate spectral matching. In MassCube, preprocessing includes (a) precursor ion exclusion, (b) noise filtering using both relative and absolute intensity thresholds (default: ions with relative intensity <1% of base peak intensity are removed; ions with absolute intensity <10,000 for Orbitrap MS and <500 for QTOF MS are removed), and (c) m/z range-restricted matching. For example, if MS data was collected from m/sz = 100–400, then MassCube only considers fragments from 100–400 for database matching. In practice, similarity scores between 0.7 and 0.8 are commonly used for putative annotations in metabolomics. A similarity score of 0.7 was chosen in MassCube by default based on its previously published entropy similarity search algorithm 36 . MassCube supports multiple MS/MS database formats including MSP, JSON, and pickle. Public MS/MS libraries for metabolomics and lipidomics, sourced from the MS-DIAL public MS/MS database, have been prepared in  pickle  format for faster loading speeds and are available at  https://zenodo.org/records/11363475 . Normalization   MassCube offers two types of data normalization. The first type addresses differences in total sample amount or concentration, such as those found in urine samples. While Probabilistic Quotient Normalization algorithm is used in MassCube by default, the optimal normalization method can vary depending on the dataset and is often debated. We therefore provide alternative algorithms, such as summed intensity, for user selection. The second type focuses on correcting systematic MS signal drifts in large-scale data acquisition. To address this, MassCube includes QC-based normalization. Timestamps from raw data are automatically acquired and utilized to guide this normalization process, requiring no need for user input. Phenotype classifier builder and data visualization   MassCube provides univariate and multivariate models for pairwise and multi-group comparisons. For more advanced, machine learning-based statistical analysis, MassCube includes the phenotype classifier builder. This module leverages the  scikit-learn  package to perform a range of tasks, including data scaling, univariate feature selection, model construction, cross-validation, and evaluation metrics such as ROC curves. Moreover, the visualization module in MassCube is available for the rapid generation of publication-quality figures, facilitating both manual inspection and data overview. Examples of these visualizations are provided in Supplementary Fig.  9 . Feature detection benchmarking   MassCube command line applications   Mass spectrometry data processing is highly application focused. MassCube is designed to support applications by integrating individual functions and modules into workflows. These pre-defined workflows simplify and accelerate data processing and analysis for specific applications. The MassCube untargeted metabolomics workflow addresses specific bottlenecks in mass spectrometry-based data processing. It integrates metadata curation, feature detection, evaluation, alignment, annotation, and statistical analysis to provide users with a comprehensive view of the data. The untargeted metabolomics workflow is implemented as a command line application. First-time users can generate results in just four steps: (1) install Python, (2) install MassCube with a single command, (3) organize raw data files in a project folder and (4) run “untargeted-metabolomics” in the folder. A test data set is provided at  https://zenodo.org/records/15173232 . A quick start user instruction is available at  https://huaxuyu.github.io/masscubedocs/docs/quickstart . Software and parameters   MassCube 1.0.22, MS-DIAL 4.90, MZmine 3.90, and  xcms  R package 4.0.0 were used for performance benchmarking. Python 3.11.7 and R 4.3.0 were used for running  masscube  Python package and  xcms  R package, respectively. Complete parameters and code for data processing were provided at  https://zenodo.org/records/14159704 . To ensure a fair comparison, common key parameters across the compared software were standardized as follows: MS1 intensity tolerance was set to 30,000 for Orbitrap and 1000 for QTOF;  m/z  tolerance for MS1 scans was 0.01 Da, and  m/z  tolerance for MS/MS scans was 0.015 Da. Specific key individual parameters in each software were set by default as recommended by the respective tools:     MassCube: sigma in Gaussian filter: 1.2; peak prominence ratio: 0.1; scan-to-scan Pearson’s correlation coefficient tolerance for feature grouping: 0.7.   MS-DIAL: mass slice width: 0.05 Da; smoothing algorithm: linear weighted moving average; smoothing level: 3 scans; minimum peak width: 5 scans.   MZmine: peak detection algorithm: ADAP; smoothing algorithm: Savitzky Golay algorithm; retention time smoothing: 5; chromatogram resolving: local minimum resolver; minimum consecutive scans: 5 scans.   xcms : peak detection algorithm:  centWave ; peak width: 5 to 60 s; signal-to-noise threshold: 0; prefilter: 3 to 100.   Synthetic MS data   Two types of synthetic MS signals were generated to represent double peaks and single peaks, respectively. For double peaks, we prepared all combinations of the three peak parameters as shown in Fig.  2b  including S/N, intensity ratio, and peak resolution. Different S/N were achieved by tuning the amplitude of Gaussian noise added to the normal distribution relative to the peak height (2, 4, 6, 8, 10%). For double peaks, the intensity ratio represented the peak height ratio of the two peaks (1, 2, 3, 4, 5), and peak resolution was varied (1.00, 1.25, 1.50, 1.75, 2.00). Double peaks where the smaller peak had an S/N lower than 3 were excluded, as they fell below the limit of detection (LOD). For each combination, 1000 random replicates were generated for optimizing parameters in MassCube, resulting in a total of 110,000 single peaks and 110,000 double peaks. For algorithm performance comparison, we generated a synthetic mzML file to ensure that all software tools process the same file for a fair evaluation. This allows for a direct comparison of feature detection accuracy and efficiency across MassCube, MS-DIAL, MZmine3, and  xcms  under identical conditions. A new set of 100 replicates for each combination was generated with an additional condition for noise score = 0, yielding a total of 13,500 double peaks and 13,500 single peaks. All generated signals were inserted into raw QTOF MS data of human urine samples, with distinct  m/z  values outside the original mass range to avoid overlapping with the real signals. The list of inserted peaks, Python code for simulation, and the generated mzML data file are available at  https://zenodo.org/records/14159704 . Benchmarking with synthetic MS data   MassCube 1.0.22, MS-DIAL 4.9, MZmine 3.90, and  xcms  R package 4.0.0 were all used to process the same synthetic mzML data file as described above. To ensure a fair comparison, the default parameters for QTOF were used across all four software platforms, as the original data were acquired from a QTOF MS. It is important to note that the settings for mass tolerance and intensity tolerance did not affect the results since the inserted synthetic MS signals were of high intensity (on the order of 10 6 ) and exhibited no mass variation between different scans. This design ensures the focus on benchmarking the performance of different algorithms with respect to varying chromatographic peak shapes rather than other factors such as  m/z  variance. Benchmarking with experimental MS data   Eight experimental LC-MS/MS data were used for benchmarking feature detection performance, including NIST SRM 1950 plasma data, acquired on Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS, reverse phase (RP) positive ion mode; NIST SRM 1950 plasma data, acquired on Thermo Q Exactive MS, RP negative ion mode; mouse plasma data, acquired on Thermo Q Exactive HF MS, hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) positive ion mode; NIST Human Fecal Material RGTM 10162 data, acquired on Thermo Q Exactive MS, HILIC negative ion mode; Human serum data, acquired on Bruker impact II QTOF MS, RP positive ion mode; Mouse feces data, acquired on Bruker impact II QTOF MS, HILIC positive ion mode; whole fruit fly ( D. melanogaster  strains) data, acquired on Bruker impact II QTOF MS, HILIC positive ion mode; and human urine data, acquired on Bruker impact II QTOF MS, HILIC negative ion mode. Raw data files, complete parameters and code for data processing, along with the output feature tables from all four tested software tools, are provided at  https://zenodo.org/records/14159704 . A total of 722 local extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) were randomly selected from the Orbitrap and QTOF data and manually labeled by experienced analytical chemists. The PNG files for labeled EICs, along with a detailed list of their corresponding  m/z  values and retention times, and information on whether they were i