>Methods   Evaluation datasets   We used the two public metabolomics benchmark datasets in [ 17 ], named as the TripleTOF 6600 dataset and the QE HF dataset. Both datasets were acquired with the full-scan method. The TripleTOF 6600 dataset was acquired by AB SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 interfaced with Shimazu L30A UPLC, and the QE HF dataset was acquired by Thermo Q Exactive HF with Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC. A pair of standard mixtures (SA, SB) were prepared for both datasets, which were composed of seven differential groups of drugs and metabolites (Gd1, Gd2, Gd3, Gm, Gd4, Gd5, Gd6) prepared at different relative concentration ratios of (1/16, 1/4, 1/2, 1/1, 2/1, 4/1, 16/1) in SB: SA. The TripleTOF 6600 dataset had four replicates for each mixture, with a total of eight runs. The QE HF dataset had five replicates for each mixture, with a total of ten runs. Benchmark libraries were provided along with the datasets, containing 970 and 836 analytes in the TripleTOF 6600 and the QE HF datasets. We further screened the benchmark libraries to remove duplicates and obtained 924 and 835 analytes, respectively. In both benchmark datasets, the retention times of mixed compounds have different drift trends due to large differences in physical and chemical properties (Additional file  1 : Fig. S1). Even after retention time alignment across runs, the retention times of analyte features still had wide shifts, which increased the difficulty of feature alignment and made the dataset more suitable for feature alignment evaluation.   Furthermore, to evaluate the performance of feature alignment methods on a bigger dataset, we used the dataset published in Metabolights MTBLS562 [ 18 ]. The MTBLS562 dataset was acquired with DDA method and acquired by AB SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 with Agilent 1290 UHPLC system. The MTBLS562 dataset contains 40 LC–MS runs of 40 mice (C57BL/6J strain, SPF level) at 5 different ages (4, 12, 24, 32 to 52 weeks, n=8 in each group). Benchmark library was provided along with the dataset, containing 245 analytes. We further screened the benchmark library to remove duplicates and noises and obtained 207 analytes. Some analytes in the library have low abundance in samples with feature intensity heights on the order of hundreds. Input preparation   G-Aligner requires users to provide a list of extracted features for each LC–MS run. G-Aligner supports feature extraction results in csv and tsv formats, which can be exported from untargeted metabolomics software. As a general method, G-Aligner only requires users to provide basic feature information, including m/z, retention time and intensity. In case of using profile-based retention time alignment methods that require raw files (such as OBI-Warp), users need to convert raw files to mzML format by MSConvert [ 19 ] or aird format by AirdPro [ 20 ] for G-Aligner analysis. Retention time alignment   To correct retention time drift and reduce the difficulty of subsequent feature matching, G-Aligner provides a feature-based retention time alignment method RANSAC (RANdom SAmple Consensus) and a profile-based method OBI-Warp (Ordered Bijective Interpolated Warping). RANSAC is an iterative method for fitting a model to data and is robust to outliers. In each iteration, the RANSAC method selects a random subset of points from the input data and fits a linear or nonlinear model to these points. The remaining points are then classified into inliers or outliers based on their consistency with the model. Among the iterations, the best-fitting model with the largest number of inliers is selected as the alignment result. OBI-Warp is an extension of dynamic time warping (DTW) for nonlinear retention time warping. For pairs of runs that need to be aligned, OBI-Warp first uses DTW to analyze the spectral similarity and obtain the optimal bijective warping function by dynamic programming. OBI-Warp combines the warping function output from DTW with piecewise cubic Hermitian interpolation and produces smooth warped functions. G-Aligner implemented OBI-Warp in Python for the first time and separated it as an independent installation package for importing by other Python-based software. These two algorithms were also applied in MZmine2 and XCMS, respectively, and their effectiveness and stability have been proven in long-term use. G-Aligner uses linear RANSAC as the default retention time alignment algorithm because it does not require additional raw file import and is faster and more stable. Feature matching   Graph building   Instead of matching features iteratively to a real or virtual reference run, G-Aligner comprehensively considers potential feature correspondences between all LC–MS runs and performs combinatorial optimization to obtain optimal solutions. After retention time coarse registration, the corresponding features of each analyte in different runs are relatively close in m/z and retention time coordinates. To find potential correspondences among all runs, G-Aligner superimposes the retention time aligned features in all runs on the same coordinate system consisting of m/z and retention time dimensions, searches neighborhoods for each feature according to the m/z and retention time tolerances set by the user, and builds an undirected relation graph containing features of all runs. Each node in the graph represents a feature, and each edge represents a potential feature correspondence between neighbor features. Graph splitting   After graph building, spatially close feature nodes are connected into many connected components, which are maximal connected subgraphs of the relation graph. A connected component is the largest set of potentially corresponding features for each contained analyte and can be treated as the smallest computing unit for combinatorial optimization. G-Aligner splits the relation graph into connected components and performs combinatorial optimization on each connected component to divide and conquer the feature matching problem. The edge weights in each connected component are calculated by the weighted sum of normalized differences in m/z, retention time and intensity. The m/z and retention time differences are normalized by user-specified m/z and retention time tolerances, and the intensity difference is the deviation in intensity normalized by the largest feature intensity in the same connected component in each run. The edge weight is calculated as Eq.  1  and Eq.  2 :     n o r m e d a r e a = area m a x i m u m a r e a i n t h e p a r t i t e   1       e d g e w e i g h t = 1 3 × | Δ m / z | m / z t o l e r a n c e + | Δ R T | R T t o l e r a n c e + 1 - min ( n o r m e d a r e a ) max ( n o r m e d a r e a )   2   Assignment solving   In graph theory, a multipartite graph is a type of graph in which the nodes can be divided into multiple independent sets. Each set of nodes is called a partite, and each edge connects a pair of nodes from different partites. After graph splitting, each connected component is a multipartite graph where edges do not connect feature nodes of the same run but different runs. To find the optimal correspondence solution, G-Aligner treats the feature matching problem on the multipartite subgraph as an unbalanced multidimensional assignment problem (MAP), in which the feature number differs in partites. MAP is a fundamental combinatorial optimization problem to find optimal matchings in a weighted multipartite graph, in which the sum of weights of the edges is minimum.   In G-Aligner, we comprehensively considered the neighborhood distribution of features in all runs and defined the unbalanced MAP of the feature matching as follows. For a multipartite graph  G  which contained feature nodes  F  from  M  runs (Eq.  3 ), let  F ( k ) represent the feature set of the  k -th LC–MS run, and  f ik k  represent the  i k -th feature node in the  k -th LC–MS run (Eq.  4 ).  F ( k ) contains  n k  deduplicated feature nodes  { f 0 k , ⋯ , f n k - 1 k }  and a placeholder node  f n k k . We define a linkage (M-partite matching) of features as  L i 1 ⋯ i M  (Eq.  5 ), which contains one feature node from each run. Each linkage represents a possible combination of related features of an analyte. When linkage  L i 1 ⋯ i M  contains a placeholder node  f n k k , it means no feature from the  k -th run was matched in the linkage. Accordingly, we recorded the empty linkage containing placeholder nodes of all runs as  L n 1 ⋯ n M . The feasible solutions  Γ  of MAP should satisfy the following constraints (Eq.  6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ). Equation  6  states that each solution  γ  contains  p  matchings, where  p  is the max node number (containing placeholder node) in each feature set. Equation  7  states that each matching uniquely corresponds to a distinct linkage. Equation  8  states that different matchings in the same solution do not contain shared non-placeholder feature nodes. Equation  9  states that each feasible solution contains all feature nodes. A figure of feature nodes, linkages and matchings in a feasible solution is shown in Fig.  2 .     F = { F ( 1 ) , … , F ( M ) }   3       F ( k ) = f i k k ∣ i k = 0 , … , n k , for k = 1 , … , M   4       L i 1 … i M = f i 1 1 , … , f i M M , for i k = 0 , … , n k , k = 1 , … , M   5       γ = γ 1 , … , γ p , p = max n 1 , … , n M + 1   6       ∀ γ j : γ j = L i 1 … i M ∃ ! tuple i 1 , … , i M   7       γ i ∩ γ j ⊂ L n 1 … n M , for i ≠ j   8       F = U j = 1 p γ j   9     Fig. 2.     Open in a new tab   Visual representation of feature nodes, linkages and matchings in a feasible solution In order to measure the quality of solutions, we calculated the cost of each solution and selected the one with the lowest cost as the optimal solution. Let  C γ  represents the cost of solution  γ , and  C γ i  represents the cost of matching  γ i  (Eq.  10 ). The cost of a solution is the total cost of all matchings contained.  C γ i  consists of distribution cost  C distribution , connectivity cost  C connectivity , missing node cost  C missing  and full match bonus  B f u l l _ m a t c h  (Eq.  11 ).   The distribution cost in a matching describes the dispersion of matched nodes. For matching  γ i , we first extract the subgraph  G γ i  from the multipartite graph  G , which contains all feature nodes and interconnected edges in  γ i . Then, we calculated the minimum spanning tree (MST) of  G γ i  to find the minimum total weight of the edge subsets connecting all nodes, and used the total weight as the distribution cost  C distribution  for matching  γ i  (Eq.  12 ). In matchings with placeholder nodes and far unconnected clusters, the number of edges in MST is lower than expected  M - 1 , resulting in undesired lower distribution cost and affecting matching priorities. Hence, we introduce the missing node cost and the connectivity cost to penalize the missing edges (Eq.  13 ,  14 ). In matchings with placeholder nodes, the edge number reduction equals the number of placeholder nodes. We calculate the missing node cost by multiplying the placeholder node number  N p  by a penalty factor  w p . In far matchings, feature nodes are far apart and form multiple clusters, which results in missing edges between clusters. The missed number of edges is equal to the number of connected subgraphs in  G γ i . Similarly, we calculate the connectivity cost by multiplying the number of connected subgraphs  N c  by a penalty factor  w c . Besides, we believe matchings with more feature nodes have greater matching priority. Appropriate incentives should be given to full matchings when competing for nodes with others. For connected full matchings, we introduce a bonus factor  b  and subtract it from the matching cost (Eq.  15 ). All factors are optimized as built-in parameters and do not require user modification.     C γ = ∑ j = 1 p C γ j   10       C γ j = C distribution + C connectivity + C missing - B f u l l _ m a t c h   11       C distribution = ∑ e ∈ E ( T ) W ( e ) , T = MST G γ i   12       C connectivity = w c ∗ N c   13       C missing = w p ∗ N p   14       B f u l l _ m a t c h = b   15     However, the multidimensional assignment problem is a well-known NP-Hard problem at three or higher dimensions. There is no known algorithm for finding the optimal solution in polynomial time. To solve MAP efficiently, G-Aligner proposed three solvers: the Gurobi solver, the Greedy solver and the VLSNS solver.   The Gurobi solver converts the multidimensional assignment problem to an integer linear programming problem and uses the state-of-the-art commercial Gurobi optimizer to find the global optimal solution. By inputting matching costs, feasible solution rules and optimization objectives into the model, the Gurobi optimizer can efficiently calculate optimization results, much faster than other linear programming solvers such as the OR-Tools developed by Google. The pseudocode of the Gurobi solver is detailed in Additional file  1 : Algorithm S1.   The Greedy solver pays more attention to the quality of a single matching than the solution. In each iteration, the Greedy solver finds the minimum cost matching, adds the matching to the solution, and sets the corresponding costs of matched features to infinite to avoid generating infeasible solutions. In thi