>Materials and Methods   Reagents   HPLC grade solvents: water, methanol and acetonitrile were purchased from Fisher (Waltham, MA, United States). AHA and HPG were purchased from Click Chemistry Tools (Scottsdale, AZ, United States). All other chemicals were purchased from Millipore Sigma (St. Louis, MO, United States) and were used as provided, with no additional purification steps. Cell Culturing   An overnight culture of  E. coli  K12 DH10B, which had been grown on M9 minimal medium (200 mg/L thiamine, 0.2% glucose), was inoculated 1:20 into 6 L of M9 medium (200 mg/L thiamine, 0.2% glucose) to yield a fresh culture of optical density, measured at a wavelength l of 600 nm, i.e., OD 600  of 0.041. 150 mL aliquots of this culture were then aliquoted into 36 Erlenmeyer flasks, which were incubated at 37°C on rotary shakers run at 200 rpm. Temperatures were independently checked with a thermometer at regular intervals to validate that temperatures were consistent across incubators throughout the experiments. Immediately following inoculation, the following incubations were started: five flasks each for (1) 50 μM MET; (2) 50 μM AHA; and (3) 50 μM HPG. One additional control flask without amendment was used to monitor growth of the cultures via optical density (OD 600 ). This was done to avoid disturbing the experimental cultures given the large number of flasks. Growth experiments with 50 μM amino acid addition (MET, AHA, or HPG) were stopped after 85 min of incubation when the control flask had reached an OD 600  of 0.072, corresponding to ∼0.74 cell generations ( Supplementary Figure S1 ). The 2 × 50 mL cell cultures were then decanted into two 50 mL tubes. Tubes were centrifuged for 5 min at 4,700  g  at room temperature. Resulting supernatants were decanted and the cell pellets flash-frozen in liquid N 2  and stored at −80°C until further processing. After these samples had been stored at −80°C, the remaining 20 flasks were processed the following way: 1 mM of (1) MET, (2) AHA, and (3) HPG were added to 5 flasks; Five additional culture flasks served as no-amendment control, which were used to track cell growth. The incubation was continued as described, with a starting OD 600  of control cell cultures of 0.27, and stopped after 5 min of amino acid pulse labeling whereby the control cultures had reached an OD 600  of 0.31, corresponding to ∼0.04 cell generations ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Cells were pelleted, pellets flash frozen, and samples stored as described above. Cultures for the heat stress experiments were conducted as described above except that cell cultures were grown and maintained at 42°C. Metabolite Extraction   Escherichia coli  intracellular metabolites were extracted using published protocols ( Hamerly et al., 2015 ). Briefly, frozen cell pellets were re-suspended with water, then sonicated using a Biologics Ultrasonic Homogenizer model 3000 for 10 pulses of 3 s each. Resulting supernatant was centrifuged and transferred to 10 mL scintillation vials to which four volumes of ice cold acetone were added, followed by storage of the samples at −80°C overnight for protein precipitation. Protein concentration in the samples was determined using a Bradford assay ( Bradford, 1976 ) ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Samples were vortexed, centrifuged, and split into two fractions for concurrent analysis by LC-MS and NMR: 1 mL for LC-MS analysis and 4 mL for NMR metabolomics analysis. Both fractions were dried completely using vacuum speed concentration with no heat, and subsequently frozen at −80°C until further use. LCMS Instrumentation and Metabolite Analysis   The dried metabolite fraction used for liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was re-suspended with 20 μL of 50:50 MeOH/H 2 O before injection into the mass spectrometer. MS-based analysis of polar metabolites was accomplished using an Agilent 1290 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system coupled to an Agilent 6538 Accurate-Mass quadrupole Time of Flight (TOF) mass spectrometer. A Cogent diamond hydride HILIC chromatography column (2.2 μM, 120 A, 150 mm × 2.1 mm Microsolv, Leland, NC, United States) was used for metabolite separation. The gradient began with solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 2 min at 50%, followed by a gradient ramp of 50–100% B over 14 min. This step was followed by a hold at 100% solvent B for 1 min, and then return to initial conditions. Mass analysis was conducted in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3500 V, dry gas temperature of 350°C at a flow of 8 L/min and the nebulizer was set at 60 psi, injecting 2 μL sample volumes, with blanks run intermittently between samples. Data acquisition parameters were as follows: 50–1,000 mass range at 1 Hz scan rate with a resolution of 18,000. Accuracy based on calibration standards was approximately 5 ppm. Statistical Analysis of MS Data   Extracted ion chromatograms, peak detection, peak annotation, chromatogram alignment, gap filling and relative quantitation of identified features was completed using MZmine ( Pluskal et al., 2010 ), MetaboAnalyst ( Chong and Xia, 2018 ), and XCMS ( Tautenhahn et al., 2012 ). Metabolite identifications were made based on exact mass and retention time matches to authentic standards using an in house library of ∼500 compounds. Statistical analysis of the MZmine output was done using Microsoft Excel version 2016 and MetaboAnalyst v4.0. XCMS utilizes an all-inclusive processing package with a similar workflow, in which it extracts chromatograms, identifies peaks, matches peaks across samples, gap fills, performs statistical analyses and  in silico  compound identification, and graphical visualization of the data. Identifications of unknown features were made using the MetLin Metabolite Database, which provided a list of possible metabolites based on exact mass, species, and likelihood ( Myers et al., 2017 ). Sample Preparation and NMR Analysis   Dried metabolite mixtures were re-suspended in 600 μL of NMR buffer (containing 0.25 mM 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid (DSS) in 90%H 2 O/10% D 2 O, 25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7), and transferred into 5 mm NMR tubes. All one dimensional (1D) 1H NMR spectra were recorded at 298 K using a Bruker AVANCE III solution NMR spectrometer operating at 600.13 MHz 1H Larmor frequency and equipped with a 5 mm liquid-helium-cooled TCI cryoprobe with Z-gradient and a SampleJetTM automatic sample loading system. 1D 1H NMR data were acquired using the Bruker supplied 1D excitation sculpting water suppression pulse sequence ‘ zgesgp’  with 256 scans, a 1H spectral window of 9,600 Hz, 32K data points, a dwell time interval of 52 μsec, and a recycle delay of 5 s between scan acquisitions. The data were first processed with the Bruker TOPSPIN 3.5 software 1  using standard parameters for chemical shift referencing using the DSS signal and line broadening (0.3 Hz). Spectral phases were manually adjusted, and a polynomial function was applied (qfil, 0.2 ppm width) on the residual water peak to remove its signal. Metabolite identification and quantification were carried out using the Chenomx TM  NMR suite software (version 8.3) 2  and its associated 600 MHz small molecule reference spectral database. DSS was used as an internal standard for metabolite quantification, while imidazole NMR signals were used to correct for small chemical shift changes arising from slight pH variations between samples. The metabolite concentration tables (mM) generated with Chenomx were exported to a.csv file and converted to μM, and normalized to sample protein concentration as established from Bradford protein assays.   Validation of metabolite IDs, which were annotated in Chenomx 3 , was accomplished using 2D  1 H- 1 H and 2D  1 H- 13 C total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY) NMR or by spiking, when available, pure metabolite standards into the samples and monitoring resulting spectral changes in the 1D  1 H NMR spectra. 2D  1 H- 1 H TOCSY spectra were acquired for representative samples using the Bruker-supplied ‘mlevphpr.2/mlevgpph19’ pulse sequences (256 × 2048 data points, 2 s relaxation delay, 32 transients per FID, 1 H spectral window of 6602.11 Hz, 80 ms TOCSY spin lock mixing period). 2D  1 H- 1 H TOCSY spectra were processed using Topspin software (Bruker version 3.2) 4 . Statistical Analysis of NMR Data   The NMR-based metabolite data were uploaded to the MetaboAnalyst v4.0 web server for multivariate statistical analysis. Metabolite concentrations were normalized by log-transformation and auto-scaling (mean centered divided by the standard deviation of each variable) prior to univariate and multivariate statistical analysis. Student  t -test, principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) were performed to identify potentially distinct metabolite patterns between the  E. coli  sample groups grown under the different conditions. Variable importance in projection (VIP) plots generated from the PLS-DA data were employed to assess the importance of each variable (i.e., metabolite) in the projection used in PLS-DA model building; statistics were calculated for the data shown in  Figure 5 , using 3 components, yielding Q2 and R2 values of 0.646 and 0.913, respectively. PLS-DA model validity was further assessed using the (B/W) permutation test function of MetaboAnalyst which, using 2,000 permutation steps yielded a  p -value of <5 × e-04, as a measure of the significance of the PLS-DA model. For hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA), distances were measured using a Euclidean correlation and clustering by the Ward algorithm.   FIGURE 5.     Open in a new tab   3D-PLSDA of metabolites as identified by NMR from the heat stressed non-canonical amino acid doped  E. coli  cultures and corresponding VIP scores table.  (A)  The PLSDA shows distinct separation between the doping groups  (B)  VIP shows the top 12 metabolites (out of 55 total metabolites) that contributed the most to the variation between sample type s. Results and Discussion   Mass Spectrometry-Based Metabolomics of Non-canonical Amino Acids   An initial set of experiments was conducted to determine the physiological impact of NCAA additions to  E. coli  cell cultures under otherwise normal growth conditions. This study established which NCAA concentrations are needed to evaluate changes in the metabolome of  E. coli  that may be relevant to normal growth conditions (i.e., cells grown at 37°C). Cultures were spiked with either 1 mM or 50 μM concentrations of AHA, HPG, or MET. MET was added as a baseline perturbation control experiment to account for the impact additional amino acid would have on the metabolism of  E. coli , as opposed to the control group, which had no amendment to the minimal growth medium. Metabolite extracts from the six conditions and control groups were prepared and analyzed by LC-MS using a high-resolution Q-TOF instrument. A total of 4,036 mass features were detected across all sample groups using the MZmine data reduction approach, as described above. Statistical analysis was done in Excel (2016) using the MZmine output, with additional statistical analysis performed using MetaboAnalyst ( Chong and Xia, 2018 ) and XCMS ( Tautenhahn et al., 2012 ). PCA was used to gather information about the variation between sample treatments and replicates. 2D-PCA plots indicated no clear separation among the different experimental groups when all m/z features were analyzed as a single input ( Figure 1A ). The 1 mM MET and both HPG groups displayed the largest separation from the other treatment groups. While principal component 1 (PC1) accounted for 44.5% of the variance, it primarily separated the 1 mM HPG samples from the other experimental conditions. The second principal component (PC2) accounted for 14.7% of the variance but did little to differentiate between the different sample groups. Overall, there was greater variation between sample treatment replicates than between the different sample treatment groups.   FIGURE 1.     Open in a new tab   2D-PCA plots of all experimental conditions from  E. coli  NCAA experiment.  (A)  MS data and  (B)  NMR data are shown.  (A)  The PCA plot of the MS data shows that only cultures grown with 1 mM HPG separate from the other experiment conditions.  (B)  The NMR data show significant overlap and a lack of differentiation between experimental groups, the only exception being the group with 50 μM HPG. A heatmap was constructed to visualize differentiated MS features between treatment groups. Heatmaps are a powerful tool for visualizing trends and correlated changes via hierarchical clustering across all samples and all features. The control and baseline-MET samples intermingled, while AHA and the HPG sample treatments mixed on the hierarchal cluster but were generally clustered apart from the MET and control samples ( Figure 2A ). The heatmap patterns indicated that not all replicates from each treatment clustered with each other; however, a general grouping by type and concentration of NCAA was discernable. The relatively few “hot zones,” or regions of high (dark red) or low (dark blue) abundance features on the heatmap suggested that only a small number of MS features exhibited log2fold changes > 2, indicating that generally minor metabolic differences existed between the different  E. coli  treatment groups. Based on 2D-PCA, ANOVA ( Supplementary Table S3 ),  t -test and HCA, we thus concluded, from the global MS data, that only small metabolic changes are occurring in  E. coli  grown in the presence of NCAA.   FIGURE 2.     Open in a new tab   Heatmaps of treatment groups clustered on metabolite intensity from  E. coli  NCAA experiment.  (A)  MS data and  (B)  NMR data are shown. The scale of the heat map indicates blue as lowest and red as highest in abundance as calculated across sample groups after normalization using fold change.  (A)  The heatmap with HCA of 4,036 features as detected by MS is shown. The lack of clustering of the different experimental groups and no significant patterns of up- or down-regulated features for the different groups are indicative of a lack of differentiation between sample types.  (B)  The NMR data (40 metabolites) also shows a lack of group clustering, the only exception being the group with 50 μM HPG. For enlarged images with metabolite names and sample identifications see  Supplementary Figure S5 . NMR Metabolite Profiles of  E. coli  Grown in the Presence of Non-canonical Amino Acids   Intracellular metabolite extracts from the same  E. coli  cell cultures were analyzed using 1D  1 H NMR spectroscopy. As with the MS studies, the NMR metabolomics data readily detected some changes in the metabolome of  E. coli  as a function of NCAA incorporation. However, these metabolite pattern changes were found to be relatively small and insufficient to unambiguously distinguish the different  E. coli  cell cultures based on 2D-PCA and HCA analyses ( Figures 1A ,  2B ) of the different NMR-based metabolite profiles. 54 metabolites were annotated by analysis of the 1D  1 H NMR spectra of the  E. coli  intracellular metabolite extracts using Chenomx ( Supplementary Table S4 ). These metabolite IDs were further validated using spiking of standards and 2D  1 H- 1 H and natural abundance  1 H- 13 C TOCSY experiments ( Supplementary Table S5 ).   Metabolite patterns between the different  E. coli  sample groups, i.e.,  E. coli  grown with MET, HPG and AHA at 1 mM and 50 μM conditions, were investigated by PCA analysis of resulting NMR-based metabolite profiles and concentrations ( Figure 1B ). As with the MS data, no clear clustering pattern or group separation were observable under these experimental growth conditions. The lack of separation along principal components 1 and 2 was particularly noticeable, leading us to conclude that while there exist metabolome differences between the different  E. coli  treatment groups, the NMR-based metabolite profile differences are not sufficiently pronounced to allow for clear treatment group separation.   A heatmap of all NMR features, based on HCA, did not result in group clustering by NCAA treatment type, rather sample types were intermingled showing no significant changes between groups ( Figure 2B ). The NMR metabolomics results are consistent with the MS spectral data. Only the 50 μM HPG samples separated as a unique cluster, similar to what is observed in the heatmap of the LC-MS spectral features ( Figure 2A ). Taken together, our results suggest that overall, the variability between biological replicates is comparable in magnitude to potential metabolic changes arising from the addition of NCAA in the  E. coli  cell cultures.   This combined MS and NMR metabolomics analysis of NCAA-treated  E. coli  cell cultures demonstrated that these analytical platforms can detect subtle changes in the metabolomes of  E. coli  grown under different culturing conditions, but that additional studies were needed to parse out how these small but potentially significant metabolic changes may impact cellular phenotypes.   E. coli  Grown With Non-canonical Amino Acid Under Heat Stress   While planning additional experiments, we evaluated how NCAA are typically used in field work and “real-world” research applications to evaluate how an organism regulates its translational activity in response to environmental ( Samo et al., 2014 ;  Hatzenpichler et al., 2016 ;  Leizeaga et al., 2017 ;  Sebastián et al., 2019 ) or (co)cultivation conditions ( Mahdavi et al., 2014 ;  Babin S. A. et al., 2016 ;  Bagert et al., 2016 ). For such purposes, cellular organisms are often grown for short periods of time under environmental perturbations or cellular stress. We concluded that a more real-world evaluation of a NCAA treatment would include an environmental stressor. Because of the extensive literature available on heat stress response in  E. coli  ( Jozefczuk et al., 2010 ;  Ye et al., 2012 ), we chose temperature increase as an appropriate stressor. Assessing metabolome changes under BONCAT treatment during heat stress would thus not only help clarify how  E. coli  cells are adapting to the incorporation of NCAA, it would also recreate a stress condition that may best reflect “real world” research applications. This rationale thus led to a second set of metabolomics investigations, which utilized high temperature as a stress condition during  E. coli  cell growth with or without a NCAA or MET present.   The heat-treated experiment of  E. coli  consisted of four groups grown at 42°C. Based on the first set of experiments, we narrowed the experimental conditions to 50 μM AHA, HPG or MET. A MET-supplemented culture was again used as a baseline comparison for BONCAT addition, while the control samples contained minimal media. Metabolomics studies and resulting multivariate statistical analysis of LC-MS and NMR metabolite profiles were conducted on heat stressed  E. coli  cell cultures, using the same approach described above for the initial study. As with our initial NCAA addition experiments, physiological data was recorded throughout the growth of the  E. coli  to monitor phenotypic changes and to assess microbial health. Optical density measurements, averaged over biological replicates, were recorded throughout the  E. coli  incubation and growth periods, and indicated that all of the cultures were within 8% OD 600  of each other, with an average OD 600  of 1.3 after 210 min of cell growth. Bradford protein assays were utilized to assess protein content and translational activity, prior to intracellular metabolite extraction, and indicated an average protein concentration of 2.1 mg/mL with all samples within 15% of the average concentration ( Supplementary Table S2 ). The range in protein concentration revealed that  E. coli  grown in the presence of AHA, HPG or MET resulted in greater intracellular amounts of proteins than the control cell cultures. MS Metabolomics of Cultures Grown With Non-canonical Amino Acids Under Heat Stress   NMR and MS analyses of the intracellular metabolomes of  E. coli  cell cultures grown under heat stress were undertaken utilizing the same analytical approaches described for our first set of experiments. LC-MS analysis identified 5,960 features across all samples. To assess variation and replication trends in the data, PCA analysis was undertaken using the MS metabolite profile data recorded on the heat stressed  E. coli  cell cultures and grown in the presence of AHA, HPG, MET or the no addition control conditions. Resulting 2D-PCA plots did not reveal significant separations between these different groups ( Figure 3A ), with PC1 accounting for 77.8% of the variance between AHA, HPG or MET treated groups (red, blue, and cyan circles) compared to control (green circle). Principal component 2 accounted for an additional 8% of the variance, reinforcing that similarities rather than differences in metabolic profiles between the treatment groups were most prominent. Variability between the control and the MET-treated cell cultures was as great as the difference between these two groups and the AHA and HPG treated groups. The MET, AHA, and HPG groups clustered more tightly, as illustrated by the shaded 95% confidence intervals of the different groups in the 2D PCA scores plot shown in  Figure 3A , compared to that of the control group. The NCAA-treated samples clustered with each other, as did the control and MET-treated  E. coli  samples. This trend was present in the initial set of experiments conducted without heat stress and became more apparent in the PCA analysis of the stressed  E. coli  sample groups ( Figure 3A ).   FIGURE 3.     Open in a new tab   2D PCA plot of MS features and NMR features of heat stressed  E. coli  cultures.  (A)  MS data and  (B)  NMR data are shown.  (A)  The variation within the control group in the MS data completely encompasses the spread of the other sample types.  (B)  Experimental groups show partial separation by NMR. Data is similar to the MS non-stressed PCA plot in that  E. coli  cells with HPG have the greatest separation. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was also undertaken for the MS-based metabolite profiles of the heat stressed and amino acid treated  E. coli  cell cultures ( Supplementary Figure S2 ). A comparison of the treatment groups to each other, resulted in an  F  value ( St Hle and Wold, 1989 ) of 0.274, and an  F  critical value of 2.61, indicating that the means of the metabolite profiles, i.e., means of the intensities of the MS spectral features, for all the sample groups were not significantly different, and no treatment group differed significantly from the others ( Supplementary Table S5 ). A  post hoc  analysis using Tukey’s honestly significant difference test (Tukey’s HSD test) was conducted with MetaboAnalyst on individual MS spectral features to identify which features accounted most significantly for group differences between the different  E. coli  growth conditions ( Supplementary Table S6 ). The analysis resulted in the identification of 907 features that changed in abundance,  Supplementary Figure S2 . This is less than 15% of all observed mass features. Each significantly changed feature was subjected to the  post hoc  Tukey HSD test. Features that fell outside the means of other treatment groups is listed ( Supplemen